---
layout: page

title: Professional Responsibility
section: '1: Introduction'
subsection: '1.2 Law as a Profession'

output: 
  pdf_document:
    latex_engine: xelatex
    template: casebook.latex
    
---

# Defining Professions

> [P]rofessions are exclusive occupational groups applying somewhat abstract knowledge to particular cases.

Andrew Abbott, *The System of Professions: An Essay on the Division of Expert Labor* (1988:8)

Professions are organized around jurisdictions, i.e. areas of work within which professions assert the exclusive right to practice

> In claiming jurisdiction, a profession asks society to recognize its cognitive structure through exclusive rights; jurisdiction has not only a culture, but also a social structure. These claimed rights may include absolute monopoly of practice and of public payments, rights of self-discipline and of unconstrained employment, control of professional training, of recruitment, and of licensing, to mention only a few.

Abbott (1988:59)

Jurisdictional boundaries and claims are subject to contest by other (established or aspiring) professions.

## Professional Culture

### Knowledge-Based Practice

Abbott (1988:8) distinguishes two “ways occupational groups control knowledge and skill”:

> One emphasizes technique per se, and occupations using it are commonly called crafts. To control such an occupation, a group directly controls its technique. The other form of control involves abstract knowledge. Here, practical skill grows out of an abstract system of knowledge, and control of the occupation lies in control of the abstractions that generate the practical techniques. The techniques themselves may in fact be delegated to other workers. For me this characteristic of abstraction is the one that best identifies the professions.

"Diagnosis, treatment, inference, and academic work provide the cultural machinery of jurisdiction." (Abbott, 1988:59)

Formal educational requirements are common but not universal.

### Orientation Toward Work

> Today the term “professional” refers more to a prescribed attitude toward any work than the status of some work. To act like a professional—to be professional in one’s work—calls for subjective investment in and identification with work, but also a kind of affective distancing from it. A professional invests his or her person in the job but does not “take it personally” when dealing with difficult co-workers, clients, patients, students, passengers, or customers. As an ideal of worker subjectivity, this requires not just the performance of a role, but a deeper commitment of the self, an immersion in and identification not just with work, but with work discipline. The popular injunction to “be professional,” to cultivate a professional attitude, style, and persona, serves as one way that the autonomy, especially of immaterial workers, can be managerially constituted up and down the post-Fordist labor hierarchy.

Kathi Weeks, *The Problem with Work: Feminism, Marxism, Antiwork Politics, & Postwork Imaginaries* (2011:74)

## Professional Structure

> [T]he social organization of professions affects the kinds of jurisdictional claims they make and their success in achieving those claims.

Abbott (1988:82)

The social organization of professions includes:

- Groups
    - Professional associations
- Controls
    - Schools, Examinations, Licenses, Codes
- Worksites
    - Firms
    - Professional-cultural bodies (“not involved in practice, but only in the purely professional work of maintaining and furthering professional knowledge.” Abbott, 1988:80)

# The Legal Profession 

## Relevant Institutions

#### American Bar Association

- Model Rules of Professional Conduct
- Standards for Lawyer Discipline

#### State Bar

- “State Bar”: licensing and disciplinary authority
- “State Bar Association”: professional association
    - membership is voluntary, except in an "unit" or “integrated” bar, e.g. California
    - NC is an "integrated bar" (State Bar of North Carolina). But there is also a voluntary association (NCBA)

#### Courts

- Inherent authority to regulate proceedings (*Creasy*)

## Sources of Law 

### Disciplinary Rules

Disciplinary rules are part of the profession's self-regulatory apparatus, ideological self-definition, and boundary maintenance.

Most states have adopted a version of the ABA Model Rules of Professional Conduct 

State rules are what actually govern

- State rules may vary from Model Rules in particular respects
    - *Riehlman* (interpreting and applying Louisiana Rule 8.3(a) on duty to report misconduct by another lawyer)

Normative foundation of the ABA Model Rules:

- "An attorney should be one whose record of conduct justifies the trust of clients, adversaries, courts, and others with respect to the professional duties owed to them." *Lane*, 544 NW2d at 374 (quoting Nebraska RPC Rule 3)
- "[T]he efficient and orderly administration of justice cannot be successfully carried on if we allow attorneys to engage in unwarranted attacks on the court [or] opposing counsel.… Such tactics seriously lower the public respect for … the Bar."  *Lane*, 544 NW2d at 375
- "An attorney who exhibits a lack of civility, good manners and common courtesty … tarnishes the … image of … the bar …." *Lane*, 544 NW2d at 375
- "Attorneys who routinely exhibit abusive, disruptive, hostile, intemperate, intimidating, irresponsible, threatening, or turbulent behavior toward others involved in the legal system are not worthy of such trust and confidence."  *Lane*, 544 NW2d at 375
- "Belief unrelated to reason is a hallmark of fanaticism, zealotry, or paranoia rather than reasoned advocacy. The practice of law requires the ability to discriminate between fact and faith, evidence and imagination, reality and hallucination."  *Lane*, 544 NW2d at 375

Earlier versions of ABA standards

- Canons of Legal Ethics (1908)
- Model Code of Professional Responsibility (1970)

The Canons reflected and embodied the values and culture of elites (predominantly male, white, Protestant) who dominated the legal profession at the time. 

- Effort to maintain professional boundaries in the face of entry by those from non-elite class, race, and ethnic backgrounds
- Bordertown (1935)

Despite the more technocratic framing of the Model Rules, they continue to embody and reproduce elite values and culture.

- Influence of class, race, gender, and other social positions on interpretation and application of the rules. See *Lane*, 544 N.W. 2d 367 (1996)

### Common Law & Statutes

#### Common Law 

- Contract
- Torts
- Agency & Fiduciary Duties

#### Statutes 

- e.g., Sarbanes-Oxley 
- See *Milavetz* (federal statute regulating "debt relief agency" applies to lawyers providing "bankruptcy assistance")