---

date: Fall Term 2022
title: Civil Procedure
part: The Legal Duties of an Attorney
chapter: Fiduciary Duties

author: Eric M. Fink
affiliation: Elon University School of Law

reference-section-title: "References"
bibliography: '../assets/bibliography/CivProCasebook.yaml'
csl: '../assets/bibliography/casebook.csl'

output:
  pdf_document:
    template: casebook.tex
    path: ../PDF/Part3.pdf

---

# 3.1: Fiduciary Duties

Attorneys are fiduciaries of their clients. As fiduciaries, they have
certain legal duties to their clients, which include:

- The Duty of Care: Ordinary care under the circumstances.

- The Duty of Loyalty: Absolute loyalty.

- The Duty of Impartiality: Absolute candor.

- The Duty of Confidentiality: Absolute confidentiality.

The duties of care, loyalty, impartiality, and confidentiality attach
whenever an attorney-client relationship begins and may continue after
an attorney-client relationship ends. Accordingly, attorneys may owe
duties to both current and former clients, which may affect an
attorney's ability to continue representing those clients or to
represent new clients.
---
lang: en
title: The Duty of Care
---

# The Duty of Care

Attorneys must exercise reasonable care when representing their clients.
Typically, courts expect attorneys to use the degree of care expected of
an ordinary attorney in similar circumstances. In other words, the duty
of care imposed on an attorney is a duty of professional care,
reflecting the expectations of both the client and other attorneys. An
attorney who fails to exercise reasonable care is negligent, and may be
liable in tort for malpractice. Attorneys may have a duty of care to
both current and former clients, and any negligent act in relation to
representation of a client may create a malpractice claim.

In order to prove a malpractice claim for a breach of the duty of care,
the plaintiff must show that a duty of care existed, the attorney
breached the duty of care, and the breach caused a harm to the
plaintiff. Of course, a duty of care exists only if an attorney-client
relationship exists. So the first element of a malpractice claim for
negligence is proving the existence of an attorney-client relationship.
---
lang: en
title: The Duty of Loyalty
---

# The Duty of Loyalty

Attorneys are fiduciaries of their clients because clients justifiably
vest confidence, good faith, reliance, and trust in their attorneys.
Accordingly, attorneys have a fiduciary duty to maintain an undivided
loyalty to their clients at all times. Attorneys must ensure that their
duties to their clients never conflict with their own financial
interests, the interests of another client, or any other interest that
would affect their ability to provide competent and diligent
representation.

Under the duty of loyalty, attorneys cannot represent anyone with an
interest adverse to one of their clients, because it would create a
conflict of interest. If that interest becomes an issue, the attorney's
loyalty would be divided between the two clients. Obviously, an attorney
cannot




represent two parties with interests directly adverse to each other,
like opposing parties in litigation, because the conflict of interest is
fundamental and unavoidable. MR 1.7, cmt. [8., But the restriction
imposed by the duty of loyalty applies more broadly. Any adverse or
potentially adverse interest may create a conflict of interest, even if
that interest is not yet at issue.
---
lang: en
title: The Duty of Impartiality
---

# The Duty of Impartiality

As fiduciaries of their clients, attorneys have a duty to provide candid
and impartial advice. In order to satisfy the duty of impartiality,
attorneys must be able to exercise their independent professional
judgment, without any conflicts of interest. If a client's interests are
adverse or potentially adverse to the attorney's interests or the
interests of another client, a conflict of interest exists that will
compromise the attorney's impartiality. Under those circumstances,
attorneys will have an incentive to provide advice that benefits
themselves or their other clients, and withhold advice that does not.
Even if the client is not harmed by the advice itself, the client is
harmed by not receiving candid and impartial advice reflecting the full
range of available options.

For example, if an attorney represents a client in a contract
negotiation, and the outcome of the negotiation could affect the
interests of another client, a conflict of interest exists, because the
attorney has an incentive to provide advice that will benefit the other
client and withhold advice that will harm the other client. Even if the
advice benefits both clients, the client receiving the advice is harmed
by not receiving candid and impartial advice. Likewise, if an attorney
both represents and has a financial interest in a corporation, a
conflict of interests exists, because the attorney has an incentive to
provide advice that will benefit the attorney's investment and withhold
advice that will not, depriving the client of the full range of options.
---
lang: en
title: "Model Rule 2.1: Advisor"
---

# Model Rule 2.1: Advisor

In representing a client, a lawyer shall exercise independent
professional judgment and render candid advice. In rendering advice, a
lawyer may refer not only to law but to other considerations such as
moral, economic, social and political factors, that may be relevant to
the client's situation.
---
lang: en
title: The Duty of Confidentiality
---

# The Duty of Confidentiality

As fiduciaries of their clients, attorneys also have a duty to maintain
the confidentiality of private information disclosed to them by their
clients. Under the duty of confidentiality, attorneys must never
disclose confidential client information to a third party not bound by
the duty of confidentiality or use confidential client information to
benefit themselves or another client. Clients are entitled to confide in
their attorney, secure in the knowledge that the confidential
information they disclose cannot be used against them.

If a client's interests are adverse or potentially adverse to the
attorney's interests or the interests of another client, a conflict of
interests exists that will compromise the attorney's ability to




maintain confidentiality. Under those circumstances, attorneys have an
incentive to use the confidential information for their own benefit or
the benefit of their other client. Even if the client is not harmed by
the use of the confidential information, the client is harmed by the
betrayal of trust.
---
lang: en
title: "Model Rule 1.6: Confidentiality of Information"
---

# Model Rule 1.6: Confidentiality of Information

a. A lawyer shall not reveal information relating to the representation
of a client unless the client gives informed consent, the disclosure is
impliedly authorized in order to carry out the representation or the
disclosure is permitted.
---
lang: en
title: Limitations on the Duties of an Attorney
---

# Limitations on the Duties of an Attorney

While the absolute duties of loyalty, impartiality, and confidentiality
are the quintessence of professional responsibility, they are
necessarily observed in the breach. Taken literally, they would
inevitably preclude attorneys from ever representing more than one
client. It is always possible that the interests of a potential client
will conflict with those of a current client. It is always possible that
advice given to one client will affect the interests of another client.
And it is always possible that confidential information disclosed by one
client will be relevant to another.

In practice, the duties of an attorney must yield to the practical
realities of representation.

Accordingly, the duties of attorneys are shaped by the rights of
clients, attorneys, and the bar. Clients are entitled to hire the
attorney of their choice, and may consent to representation, despite a
formal conflict. Attorneys are entitled to represent more than one
client, so long as they disclose any conflicts and the client consents.
And the bar is entitled to prevent parties from using conflicts
strategically to disqualify opposing counsel.

In other words, clients may provide informed consent to certain
conflicts of interest. Attorneys may represent clients with conflicts of
interests under certain circumstances, so long as the clients provide
informed consent. And under certain circumstances, the bar may even
permit attorneys to represent parties with conflicting interests without
consent.

However, attorneys must always observe the duty of care. An attorney who
fails to exercise reasonable care under the circumstances is negligent
and potentially liable for malpractice, even if the client consents.

Ishmael v. Millington, 241 Cal. App. 2d 520 (Cal. Ct. App. 1966)

Summary: Earl F. Anders and Roberta Ishmael were married and owned a
trucking company. Eventually, they decided to divorce. Under California
law, Ishmael was entitled to 50% of the marital assets. Attorney Robert
Millington had previously represented Anders and his company. Anders
asked Millington to represent Ishmael. He agreed, and prepared a
settlement agreement that Ishmael signed. Ishmael was entitled to
$41,250, but under the agreement she received $8,807. Ishmael filed a
malpractice action, and




the trial court granted Millington's motion for summary judgment. The
appellate court reversed, holding that a jury could have found that
Millington breached his duty of care.

FRIEDMAN, J.

This is a legal malpractice action in which the plaintiff-client appeals
from a summary judgment granted the defendant-attorney. The factual
narrative will possess heightened significance against a backdrop of
general doctrine:

Actionable legal malpractice is compounded of the same basic elements as
other kinds of actionable negligence: duty, breach of duty, proximate
cause, damage. Touching the first element, duty, the general rule is
that "the attorney, by accepting employment to give legal advice or to
render other legal services, impliedly agrees to use such skill,
prudence, and diligence as lawyers of ordinary skill and capacity
commonly possess and exercise in the performance of the tasks which they
undertake."

In this case the defense is that the client sought no advice from the
attorney and was given none; by the client's express admission, she did
not rely on the attorney, thus, that her alleged damage was not
proximately caused by the attorney's cause of action.

The facts are presented by summary judgment affidavits, which include
extracts from depositions. There is no significant conflict in the
evidence. Roberta Ishmael, the plaintiff, was formerly married to Earl
F. Anders. The couple had three children. They lived in Gridley, where
Mr. Anders was a partner in a family trucking business. Domestic
difficulties resulted in a separation, and Mrs. Anders moved to
Sacramento where she secured employment. She and her husband agreed upon
a divorce and property settlement. She knew that she was entitled to
one-half the marital property.

Mr. Anders called upon defendant Robert Millington, a Gridley attorney
who had for some time represented him and his trucking firm. Mr.
Millington advised Anders that if he could establish adulterous conduct
by Mrs. Anders, he might be awarded more than one-half the community
property. For one reason or another there was a decision that the wife
rather than the husband would apply for divorce. At Anders' request Mr.
Millington agreed to act as the wife's attorney, to prepare the
necessary papers and to file a divorce action for her. He drew up a
complaint and a property settlement agreement and handed these documents
to Mr. Anders, who took them to Sacramento and had his wife sign them.
She knew that Mr. Millington had represented her husband in the past.
Faulty recall prevents ascertainment whether Mrs. Anders ever met
personally with the attorney before the papers were drawn. She did not
discuss the property settlement agreement with the attorney before she
signed it. Mr. Millington believed the divorce and property settlement
arrangements were "cut and dried" between the husband and wife; he
"assumed that she knew what she was doing;" he believed that she was
actually getting half the property but made no effort to confirm that
belief.




In her deposition the former Mrs. Anders testified that in signing the
complaint and property settlement agreement she relied solely on her
husband and did not rely on the attorney. Later, when so instructed, she
traveled to the courthouse at Oroville, where she and her corroborating
witness met Mr. Millington. He escorted her through a routine ex parte
hearing which resulted in an interlocutory divorce decree and judicial
approval of the property settlement.

According to her complaint, the former Mrs. Anders discovered that in
return for a settlement of $8,807 she had surrendered her right to
community assets totaling $82,500. Ascribing her loss to the
attorney's negligent failure to make inquiries as to the true worth of
the community property, she seeks damages equivalent to the difference
between what she received and onehalf the asserted value of the
community.

By the very act of undertaking to represent Mrs. Anders in an
uncontested divorce suit, Mr. Millington assumed a duty of care toward
her, whatever its degree. Described in terms traditionally applicable to
the attorney-client relationship, the degree of care exacted by that
duty was that of a figurative lawyer of ordinary skill and capacity in
the performance of like tasks.

The degree of care is related to the specific situation in which the
defendant found himself. The standard is that of ordinary care under the
circumstances of the particular case. A lawyer owes undivided loyalty to
his client. Minimum standards of professional ethics usually permit him
to represent dual interests where full consent and full disclosure
occur. The loyalty he owes one client cannot consume that owed to the
other. Most descriptions of professional conduct prohibit his
undertaking to represent conflicting interests at all; or demand that he
terminate the threeway relationship when adversity of interest appears.
Occasional statements sanction informed representation of divergent
interests in "exceptional" situations. Even those statements demand
complete disclosure of all facts and circumstances which, in the
attorney's honest judgment, may influence his client's choice, holding
the attorney civilly liable for loss caused by lack of disclosure.

Divorces are frequently uncontested; the parties may make their
financial arrangements peaceably and honestly; vestigial chivalry may
impel them to display the wife as the injured plaintiff; the husband may
then seek out and pay an attorney to escort the wife through the
formalities of adjudication. We describe these facts of life without
necessarily approving them. Even in that situation the attorney's
professional obligations do not permit his descent to the level of a
scrivener. The edge of danger gleams if the attorney has previously
represented the husband. A husband and wife at the brink of division of
their marital assets have an obvious divergence of interests.
Representing the wife in an arm's length divorce, an attorney of
ordinary professional skill would demand some verification of the
husband's financial statement; or, at the minimum, inform the wife that
the husband's statement was unconfirmed, that wives may be cheated,
that prudence called for investigation and verification. Deprived of
such disclosure, the wife cannot make a free and intelligent choice.
Representing both spouses in an uncontested divorce situation (whatever
the ethical implications), the attorney's professional obligations
demand no less. He may not set a shallow limit on the depth to which he
will represent the wife.




The general standard of professional care is appropriate to the garden
variety situation, where the attorney represents only one of several
parties or interests. It falls short of adequate description where the
attorney's professional relationship extends to two clients with
divergent or conflicting interests in the same subject matter. A more
specific statement of the same rule is needed to guide the fact trier to
the law's demands when the attorney attempts dual representation. In
short, an attorney representing two parties with divergent interests
must disclose all facts and circumstances which, in the judgment of a
lawyer of ordinary skill and capacity, are necessary to enable his
client to make free and intelligent decisions regarding the subject
matter of the representation.

In view of the degree of care imposed by law on an attorney in
defendant's position, a fact trier might reasonably find him negligent
in failing to disclose to plaintiff the limited representation she was
receiving and in failing to point to the possibility of independent
legal advice. The question of breach was thus a triable issue which
could not be resolved on a summary judgment motion.

Legal malpractice may consist of a negligent failure to act. The
attorney's negligence, whether consisting of active conduct or a
failure to act, need not be the sole cause of the client's loss. Here
the attorney is charged not with erroneous advice, but with failure to
advise, failure to investigate, failure to disclose. The wife's
reliance on her husband's alleged misrepresentations is not at all
inconsistent with the claim that her loss was the result of the
attorney's negligent failure. A jury might find that the husband's
misrepresentations were a realizable likelihood which made the
attorney's inaction negligent, thus forming a concurrent (and not
superseding) cause of harm. Causation was a jury question which could
not be resolved as a matter of law.

Contributory negligence on plaintiffs part was specially pleaded and, if
established, would bar malpractice recovery. Plaintiff, as she
testified, relied on her husband's list of assets; apparently did not
trouble to investigate or even to inquire whether she was getting her
share of property; was seemingly content to let her husband take charge;
accepted his attorney for the limited purpose of piloting her through
the divorce formalities. A court, however, cannot say that reasonable
jurors would inevitably characterize her conduct as contributory
negligence. That issue was a triable issue of fact.

Thus, notwithstanding the lack of conflict in the evidence, the summary
judgment rests on the determination of issues reserved for decision by a
fact trier and which could not be resolved as a matter of law. Since
triable issues of fact existed, the motion should have been denied.
---
lang: en
title: "Questions:"
---

# Questions:

8. Did Anders assert a violation of the duty of care, the duty of
loyalty, or both?

8. Did Anders show a violation of the duty of care, the duty of
loyalty, or both?

8. Could Anders have prevailed on a violation of either the duty of
care or the duty of loyalty?



---
lang: en
title: The Appearance of Impropriety
---

# The Appearance of Impropriety

Let this, my young Readers, be your constant Maxim, That no Man can be
good enough to enable him to neglect the Rules of Prudence; nor will
Virtue herself look beautiful, unless she be bedecked with the outward
Ornaments of Decency and Decorum. 39

The ABA has long held that judges should avoid "the appearance of
impropriety." When the ABA adopted the Canons of Judicial Ethics in
1924, Canon 4 held that judges should avoid "the appearance of
impropriety." When it adopted the Code of Judicial Conduct in 1972,
Canon 2 held that a judge should avoid "the appearance of impropriety in
all his actions." When it adopted the Model Code of Judicial Conduct in
1990, Canon 2A maintained the appearance of impropriety standard,
holding that "the test for the appearance of impropriety is whether the
conduct would create in reasonable minds a perception that the judge's
ability to carry out judicial responsibilities with integrity,
impartiality and competence is impaired." And Rule 1.2 of the revised
Model Rules of Judicial Conduct retains the same standard.

But lawyers have resisted applying the appearance of impropriety
standard to themselves.

When the ABA adopted the Model Code of Professional Responsibility in
1969, it included the appearance of impropriety standard only as an
"ethical consideration," rather than a "disciplinary rule," making it
aspirational, rather than mandatory. And when the ABA adopted the Model
Rules of Professional Conduct in 1983, it eliminated the appearance of
impropriety standard entirely.
---
lang: en
title: Model Code of Professional Responsibility
---

# Model Code of Professional Responsibility

Canon 9: A Lawyer Should Avoid Even the Appearance of Professional
Impropriety Ethical Consideration 9-2

Public confidence in law and lawyers may be eroded by irresponsible or
improper conduct of a lawyer. On occasion, ethical conduct of a lawyer
may appear to laymen to be unethical. In order to avoid
misunderstandings and hence to maintain confidence, a lawyer should
fully and promptly inform his client of material developments in the
matters being handled for the client. While a lawyer should guard
against otherwise proper conduct that has a tendency to diminish public
confidence in the legal system or in the legal profession, his duty to
clients or to the public should never be subordinate merely because the
full discharge of his obligation may be misunderstood or may tend to
subject him or the legal profession to criticism. When explicit ethical
guidance does not exist, a lawyer should determine his conduct by acting
in a manner that promotes public confidence in the integrity and
efficiency of the legal system and the legal profession.
---
lang: en
title: "Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers § 121(c)(iv):
  The perspective for determining conflict of interest"
---

# Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers § 121(c)(iv): The perspective for determining conflict of interest

Henry Fielding, The History of Tom Jones, A Foundling (1749).




This Section employs an objective standard by which to assess the
adverseness, materiality, and substantiality of the risk of the effect
on representation. The standard of this Section is not the "appearance
of impropriety" standard formerly used by some courts to define the
scope of impermissible conflicts. That standard could prohibit not only
conflicts as defined in this Section, but also situations that might
appear improper to an uninformed observer or even an interested party.

The propriety of the lawyer's action should be determined based only on
facts and circumstances that the lawyer knew or should have known at the
time of undertaking or continuing a representation. It should not be
evaluated in light of information that became known only later and that
could not reasonably have been anticipated.

The standard of this Section allows consideration in a given situation
of the social value of the lawyer's behavior alleged to constitute the
conflict. For example, a lawyer's statement about a matter of public
importance might conflict with a client's objectives, but the public
importance of free expression is a factor to be considered in limiting
the possible reach of the relevant conflicts rule.

Whether there is adverseness, materiality, and substantiality in a given
circumstance is often dependent on specific circumstances that are
ambiguous and the subject of conflicting evidence. Accordingly, there
are necessarily circumstances in which the lawyer's avoidance of a
representation is permissible but not obligatory. A lawyer also would be
justified in withdrawing from some representations in circumstances in
which it would be improper to disqualify the lawyer or the lawyer's
firm.
---
lang: en
title: "Model Code of Judicial Conduct: Canon 1 Rule 1.2: Promoting
  Confidence in the Judiciary"
---

# Model Code of Judicial Conduct: Canon 1 Rule 1.2: Promoting Confidence in the Judiciary

A judge shall act at all times in a manner that promotes public
confidence in the independence, integrity, and impartiality of the
judiciary, and shall avoid impropriety and the appearance of
impropriety.

RMle 1.2, Q&mro&ntj-S

The test for appearance of impropriety is whether the conduct would
create in reasonable minds a perception that the judge violated this
Code or engaged in other conduct that reflects adversely on the judge's
honesty, impartiality, temperament, or fitness to serve as a judge.

Bd. Of. Ed. Of. NY City v. Nyquist, 590 F. 2d 1241 (2d Cir. 1979)

Summary: The Board of Education of the City of New York used separate
seniority lists when deciding layoffs of male and female Health and
Physical Education teachers (HPETs). The Commissioner of Education held
that using separate lists was illegal, but




the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW) disagreed,
arguing that merging the lists would violate Title IX by
disproportionately affecting women. The BoE filed a declaratory judgment
action against three male and three female HPETs. The male HPETs were
represented by James R. Sandner of New York State United Teachers
(NYSUT). The female HPETs filed a motion to disqualify Sandner, on the
ground that their union dues helped pay for his services. The district
court granted the motion, but the Second Circuit reversed, holding that
no conflict of interest existed, and that any appearance of impropriety
was insufficient to require disqualification.

Before FEINBERG, MANSFIELD and SMITH, Circuit Judges.

FEINBERG, Circuit Judge:

This unusual case presents difficult questions regarding the appropriate
role of federal courts when called upon by disqualification motions to
evaluate the conduct of attorneys who appear before them. Three male
Health and Physical Education teachers (HPETs) in the New York City
school system appeal from an order of the United States District Court
for the Southern District of New York, Morris E. Lasker, J.,
disqualifying their counsel upon the motion of three female HPETs.
Appellant male teachers claim that the order was an abuse of discretion
because it disregarded their constitutional rights, and was without any
sound basis. For reasons set forth below, we hold that the motion to
disqualify should have been denied, and we therefore reverse the order
of the district court.

The contending parties on appeal - the male and female HPETs - are all
defendants in this declaratory judgment action brought by the Board of
Education of the City of New York and the Chancellor of the City School
District. In February 1977, these plaintiffs found themselves in the
middle of apparently contradictory positions held by the Commissioner of
Education of the State of New York and the office of Civil Rights of the
Department of Health, Education and Welfare (HEW). In a case involving
one of these appellants, the State Commissioner had ruled that the use
of separate seniority lists for male and female HPETs for the purpose of
layoffs was illegal. Shortly thereafter, HEW initially indicated to the
Board that HEW took exactly the contrary view, that merger of the lists
would violate Title IX. Caught in this apparent dilemma, plaintiffs
provisionally merged the seniority lists of male and female HPETs and
commenced this action for a declaratory judgment in which all concerned
parties would be present. The complaint named as defendants HEW and its
Secretary, the New York State Commissioner of Education, the State
Division of Human Rights, three named male HPETs, individually and as
representatives of all male HPETs, and three named female HPETs,
individually and as representatives of all female HPETs. The male and
female defendants have asserted counterclaims and cross-claims. The
relief sought by plaintiffs is a judgment declaring that the provisional
policy of merging the seniority lists, effective February 1, 1977 but
not retroactively, is lawful.




The two classes of defendants are the actual contending parties in this
litigation. The male HPETs allege that maintaining separate seniority
lists for male and female HPETs is illegal and that:

all defendant male Health and Physical Education teachers who were laid
off on or after September 1, 1975, are entitled to reinstatement with
back pay and all other retroactive benefits incident to their positions
to the date of their layoff if less senior female teachers were retained
at that time or at any time thereafter.

The female HPETs allege that their seniority status perpetuates past
discriminatory practices of plaintiffs and that if the provisional
merged seniority list is used for layoff purposes "it will result in the
layoff of at least six times as many female HPETs as male HPETs." The
stakes in the lawsuit are obviously high.

The male HPETs are represented in this action by James R. Sandner, Esq.,
who is also General Counsel of New York State United Teachers (NYSUT).
That organization is an unincorporated membership association of
approximately 180,000 teachers, librarians, guidance counsellors and
other school related employees of the almost 800 school districts in New
York State. We are told that in each of the school districts there is a
separate local union, which is the exclusive bargaining representative
for employees in that unit. The majority of these individual unions have
chosen to affiliate themselves with NYSUT, but the latter does not
collectively bargain for any public employees. It does, however, provide
a number of services to its members, including a legal service program
under the direction and control of Mr. Sandner. Both the male and female
HPETs are represented in collective bargaining by the American
Federation of Teachers (AFT), to whom they pay dues. A portion of the
dues paid to the AFT is remitted to NYSUT, which, at least in part,
apparently finances the legal service program.

Under the program, NYSUT's members may apply to obtain legal
representation free of charge. Mr. Sandner and his staff may take an
applicant's case when, in their judgment, the claim is both job-related
and meritorious. It is through this procedure that the male defendants
retained Mr. Sandner as their attorney. NYSUT itself, however, has taken
no position on the merits or on any other issue in this litigation.

The female HPETs moved to disqualify Mr. Sandner as counsel for the male
HPETs or, in the alternative, to require NYSUT to furnish counsel for
the female teachers. Judge Lasker concluded that "the female teachers
are paying, in part, for their opponents' legal expenses." This violated
"at least the spirit, if not the letter, of Canon 9 of the Code of
Professional Responsibility that 'A lawyer should avoid even the
appearance of impropriety.'" Accordingly, the judge granted the motion
and this appeal by the male HPETs followed.

We begin the discussion by noting that, curiously, the power of the
federal courts to disqualify attorneys in litigation pending before them
has long been assumed without discussion, and attention has focused on
identifying the circumstances in which exercise of the power is
appropriate. Our reading of the cases in this circuit suggests that we
have utilized the power of




trial judges to disqualify counsel where necessary to preserve the
integrity of the adversary process in actions before them. In other
words, with rare exceptions disqualification has been ordered only in
essentially two kinds of cases: (1) where an attorney's conflict of
interests in violation of Canons 5 and 9 of the Code of Professional
Responsibility undermines the court's confidence in the vigor of the
attorney's representation of his client, or more commonly (2) where the
attorney is at least potentially in a position to use privileged
information concerning the other side through prior representation, for
example, in violation of Canons 4 and 9, thus giving his present client
an unfair advantage. In such cases, we note Chief Judge Kaufman's
oft-quoted admonition that,

When dealing with ethical principles, we cannot paint with broad
strokes. The lines are fine and must be so marked. Guideposts can be
established when virgin ground is being explored, and the conclusion in
a particular case can be reached only after a painstaking analysis of
the facts and precise application of precedent.

But in other kinds of cases, we have shown considerable reluctance to
disqualify attorneys despite misgivings about the attorney's conduct.
This reluctance probably derives from the fact that disqualification has
an immediate adverse effect on the client by separating him from counsel
of his choice, and that disqualification motions are often interposed
for tactical reasons. And even when made in the best of faith, such
motions inevitably cause delay. For example, this lawsuit has been at a
standstill now for close to a year.

Weighing the needs of efficient judicial administration against the
potential advantage of immediate preventive measures, we believe that
unless an attorney's conduct tends to "taint the underlying trial" by
disturbing the balance of the presentations in one of the two ways
indicated above, courts should be quite hesitant to disqualify an
attorney. Given the availability of both federal and state comprehensive
disciplinary machinery, there is usually no need to deal with all other
kinds of ethical violations in the very litigation in which they
surface.

With these thoughts in mind, we turn to the ethical problems presented
by the instant appeal. The district court disqualified Mr. Sandner
because a "layman's faith would be severely troubled" by the fact that
"the female teachers are paying, in part, for their opponents' legal
expenses." There is no claim, however, that Mr. Sandner feels any sense
of loyalty to the women that would undermine his representation of the
men. Nor is there evidence that his representation of the men is
anything less than vigorous. There is also no claim that the men have
gained an unfair advantage through any access to privileged information
about the women. Were there any such problem, the women would not be
asking, and the district judge would not have ordered, as an alternative
to disqualification of Mr. Sandner, that NYSUT pay their attorney's
fees. Thus, in no real sense can Mr. Sandner's representation of the
men be said to taint the trial.

We agree that there is at least some possibility that Mr. Sandner's
representation of the men has the appearance of impropriety, because of
the large number of union members involved and the public importance of
the civil rights issue at the heart of the dispute. But in any event,




we think that disqualification was inappropriate. We believe that when
there is no claim that the trial will be tainted, appearance of
impropriety is simply too slender a reed on which to rest a
disqualification order except in the rarest cases. This is particularly
true where, as in this case, the appearance of impropriety is not very
clear. We note that while on one hand there is an element of unfairness
to the women, on the other it seems probable that if NYSUT were to take
a position on the merits of this litigation, Mr. Sandner's
representation of the men would apparently be within the protection of
the "fair representatioa. cases. This means that the question whether
Mr. Sandner's conduct is unethical could be a very close one. Since
disqualification entails immediate disruption of the litigation, it is
better to relegate any questions about Mr. Sandner's conduct to other
appropriate proceedings. In addition to the possibility of grievance
proceedings and an internal union attack on the legal plan, it may be
that judicial construction of the plan, in an appropriate lawsuit, could
provide some relief for the women.

We therefore reverse the order of the district court disqualifying
counsel, and remand for continuation of the action.
---
lang: en
title: "Questions:"
---

# Questions:

8. Who does Sandner represent? Does he represent the female members of
the teachers union? Does he have any duties to the plaintiffs in this
action?

8. Why might someone be concerned about an appearance of impropriety
under these circumstances? Why did the court find that any appearance of
impropriety did not prevent Sandner from representing the male teachers?

8. Do you agree with the court's conclusion? Would you feel differently
if the male teachers were paying for their own representation? Would you
feel differently if the union provided representation for the female
teachers?

In re Disciplinary Proc. Against Sanders, 145 P. 3d 1208 (Wa. 2006)

Summary: Justice Sanders of the Washington Supreme Court visited the
Special Commitment Center on McNeil Island, which houses people civilly
committed as sexually violent predators. During the visit, Sanders
accepted documents from inmates and asked them about volitional control,
among other things. The Attorney General of Washington filed a complaint
against Sanders with the Washington Commission on Judicial Conduct.
After an investigation and a hearing, the Commission found that Sanders
violated Canon 1 by failing to enforce high standards of judicial
conduct and also violated Canon 2(A) by failing to promote public
confidence in the integrity and impartiality of the judiciary. Sanders
appealed and the court affirmed.

GROSSE, J.

A visit by a judicial officer to a special facility for sexually violent
predators is not in itself inappropriate conduct under the Code of
Judicial Conduct. However, conversations with the residents of the
facility concerning the reasons for their confinement, particularly when
one or




more of these residents has a matter or matters pending before the court
on which the judge sits, can violate the Code of Judicial Conduct. By
asking questions of inmates who were litigants or should have been
recognized as potential litigants on issues currently pending before the
court, Justice Richard B. Sanders violated the Code of Judicial Conduct.
His conduct created an appearance of partiality as a result of ex parte
contact.

The Washington Commission on Judicial Conduct received a complaint on
March 18, 2003, regarding Justice Sanders' conduct while visiting the
Special Commitment Center (SCC) on McNeil Island. The Commission
conducted an independent investigation of the allegations, determined
that sufficient evidence existed to support the complaint, and sent a
Statement of Allegations to Justice Sanders on October 8, 2003. In April
2004, the Commission determined that probable cause existed to believe
that Justice Sanders violated Canons 1, 2(A) and 3(A)(4) of the Code of
Judicial Conduct. After a fact-finding hearing, the Commission issued
its decision holding that Justice Sanders violated Canons 1 and 2(A),
but did not violate Canon 3(A)(4). The Commission found that Justice
Sanders' conduct violated Canon 1 by failing to enforce high standards
of judicial conduct and also violated Canon 2(A) by failing to promote
public confidence in the integrity and impartiality of the judiciary.
The Commission imposed the sanction of admonishment. Under Discipline
Rules for Judges 3, Justice Sanders filed a notice of contest.

Justice Sanders embarked on a tour of the SCC despite warnings from his
colleagues on the Supreme Court about potential ex parte contact with
litigants. During the tour of this facility, Justice Sanders accepted
documents on two separate occasions from the inmates. Moreover, in
meetings with the residents, some of whom had cases pending before the
court, he directly asked them about the issue of volitional control.

At the time of the visit, the Supreme Court was in the process of
deciding In re Detention of Thorell. Drafts of both a majority opinion
and a dissent by Justice Sanders were circulating among the justices at
the Supreme Court. Thorell was a seminal case in which separate actions
by six petitioners were combined, including at least one of the SCC
residents with whom Justice Sanders met. A pivotal issue before the
Supreme Court in Thorell was volitional control. The court was weighing
whether the "fact finder must determine that the person facing
commitment as a sexually violent predator (SVP) has serious difficulty
controlling behavior and, if so, whether this determination must be a
separate finding based upon a jury instruction." Thus, the factual
record was before the court in each of the consolidated six cases.

The Commission held, and we agree, that the record established through
clear, cogent, and convincing evidence that Justice Sanders violated
Canons 1 and 2(A). In support of that holding, the findings reference
two of the three letters from resident Andre Brigham Young inviting the
justices to visit McNeil Island. Those letters indicate that the
residents were looking for something more than just a tour of the
facility. In fact, Young suggested that others (opposing counsel and
defense attorneys) should be asked to attend to avoid "the appearance of
partiality." The letters in and of themselves should have given
sufficient notice to Justice Sanders that this visit had the potential
of being more than an institutional tour. Additional




warning flags were also raised by three justices who expressed concerns
about the visit and potential problems. Moreover, a simple computer
check would have revealed that Rickey Calhoun and Andre Brigham Young,
two people mentioned in the prior communication with Justice Sanders,
had cases pending before the Supreme Court. When Justice Sanders met
with the residents in small groups, he warned the residents that he
could not hear their particular case issues. However, these warnings
were followed by specific questions asking the residents about their
confinement and what they thought of volitional control.

The Commission justifiably found that Justice Sanders, with full
awareness of the potential for situations that could conflict with the
Code of Judicial Conduct, embarked on the tour and met with litigants
who had pending cases before the court. Further, by raising such
critical issues as volitional control with these litigants, Justice
Sanders created a situation that clearly violated both the letter and
the spirit of the canons and created serious concern for both counsel
and fellow jurists about the appearance of partiality.

Justice Sanders claims that a violation of Canons 1 and 2(A) cannot be
found without a concomitant violation of a proscribed act or canon and
thus the Commission's failure to find a direct violation of Canon
3(A)(4) precludes it from finding a violation of the other canons. We
disagree.

In our view, Turco is dispositive. There, the court found that the
judge's act of striking his wife in public had a sufficient nexus to
the judicial role, particularly when the judge heard domestic violence
cases. If extrajudicial tortious conduct can provide a nexus to the
judicial role, then a fortiori, judicial conduct can provide a basis for
a violation of Canons 1 and 2(A). In the instant case, Justice Sanders'
actions were not simply undertaken as a private citizen, but rather
within the context of his judicial duties. Our conclusion is underscored
by the decision in In re Disciplinary Proceeding Against Ritchie. In
that case, Judge John G. Ritchie argued that Canons 1 and 2(A) of the
Code of Judicial Conduct, together with the statute regulating the
behavior, were too vague to give him adequate notice of the prohibited
behavior. In denying the claim, the court stated:

It is true the conduct pursuant to which he was disciplined is not
clearly proscribed by RCW 3.58.040, insofar as the statute does not
expressly prohibit judges from combining business and pleasure trips,
and does not define "reasonable traveling expenses" or "business of the
court".

Judge Ritchie's vagueness challenge is ultimately immaterial, however,
because he was not disciplined for violating the statute. Rather, he was
censured for violating Canons 1 and 2(A) of the Code of Judicial Conduct
which hold judges to a higher standard of integrity and require avoiding
even the appearance of impropriety.

As noted in the Commission's decision, there are a number of facts in
this case that, when taken together, clearly demonstrate that a
predictable appearance of partiality could be foreseen.




Where a judge's decisions are tainted by even a mere suspicion of
partiality, the effect on the public's confidence can be debilitating.
The canons of judicial conduct should be viewed in broad fashion, and
judges should err on the side of caution. Under Canon 3(D)(1), "judges
should disqualify themselves in a proceeding in which their impartiality
might reasonably be questioned." In Sherman, the court found that where
a trial judge "may have inadvertently obtained information critical to a
central issue on remand, a reasonable person might question his
impartiality." The court set the test for determining impartiality:

In deciding recusal matters, actual prejudice is not the standard. The
Commission recognizes that where a trial judge's decisions are tainted
by even a mere suspicion of partiality, the effect on the public's
confidence in our judicial system can be debilitating. The test for
determining whether the judge's impartiality might reasonably be
questioned is an objective test that assumes that "a reasonable person
knows and understands all the facts."

This court in In re Disciplinary Proceeding Against Sanders noted that
the interest of the State in maintaining and enforcing high standards of
judicial conduct under the auspices of Canon 1 is a compelling one. In
Sanders, this court balanced that interest against Justice Sanders'
First Amendment rights and found that an independent basis for finding a
violation of Canon 1 under those circumstances was not possible. Justice
Sanders argues that the language in Canon 1 is hortatory and therefore
cannot stand as an independent basis for a violation of the Code of
Judicial Conduct. In the instant case, Canon 1 sets the conceptual
framework under which Canon 2(A) operates. Canon 2(A) provides the more
specific restraint, to wit: "Judges should act at all times in a manner
that promotes public confidence in the integrity and impartiality of the
judiciary." Under the circumstances of this case, Canon 1 taken in
conjunction with Canon 2(A) provides a sufficiently specific basis to
find a violation of the Code of Judicial Conduct.

Here, it was clear that there was a substantial basis and expectation
that Justice Sanders would be in contact with possible litigants who had
pending litigation before the court and that this contact would be
viewed as improper. We concur with the Commission's finding that it was
clearly reasonable to question the impartiality of the justice under the
circumstances of this case.
---
lang: en
title: "Questions:"
---

# Questions:

8. Why did the court hold that visiting the Special Commitment Facility
did not create an appearance of impropriety, but speaking to a resident
of the facility did?

8. Would it create an appearance of impropriety for a judge to visit a
prison? What if the judge spoke to an inmate?

8. Would it create an appearance of impropriety for a judge to speak
with a person who had a pending civil action?
---
lang: en
title: "Further Reading:"
---

# Further Reading:




- Peter W. Morgan, The Appearance of Propriety: Ethics Reform and the
Blifil Paradoxes ,

44 Stan. L. Rev. 593 (1992)

- W. Bradley Wendel, Impartiality in Judicial Ethics: A Jurisprudential
Analysis, 22 Notre

Dame J.L. Ethics & Pub. Pol'y 305 (2008)

- Ronald D. Rotunda, Judicial Ethics, the Appearance of Impropriety, and
the Proposed

New ABA Judicial Code , 34 Hofstra Law Review 1337 (2006)



---
lang: en
title: "3.2: Malpractice"
---

# 3.2: Malpractice

Attorneys may be liable for malpractice if they violate any of their
fiduciary duties of care, loyalty, impartiality, or confidentiality.
However, the standard for liability may differ depending on the duty at
issue. Attorneys may be liable for a violation of the duty of care only
if they are negligent. But they may be liable for any violation of the
duties of loyalty, impartiality, and confidentiality.

Under the duty of care, attorneys must always exercise reasonable care
under the circumstances. Attorneys are professionals, so the
professional standard of care applies. In other words, an attorney must
exercise the standard of care that an ordinary attorney would exercise
under similar circumstances. If an attorney breaches the duty of care,
then the attorney is negligent, and may be liable in tort for
malpractice.

By contrast, under the duties of loyalty, impartiality, and
confidentiality, attorneys must always avoid conflicts of interest,
provide candid advice, and protect confidential information. Any
violation of these duties is a tort, irrespective of negligence. In
effect, they are analogous to strict liability torts.
---
lang: en
title: The Elements of the Tort of Legal Malpractice
---

# The Elements of the Tort of Legal Malpractice

Legal malpractice is a tort, with the same basic elements as any other
tort claim: duty, breach, causation, and damages. An attorney has a duty
only if an attorney-client relationship exists. Accordingly, the
plaintiff in an action claiming legal malpractice must prove:

8. Existence of an attorney-client relationship

8. Breach of a legal duty

8. Factual causation of harm

8. Proximate causation of harm

8. Actual damages
---
lang: en
title: Legal Duty
---

# Legal Duty

Attorneys owe legal duties to their clients, but do not owe legal duties
to non-clients.

Accordingly, the threshold question in a malpractice action is whether
the plaintiff is a client to whom the attorney owes legal duties.
---
lang: en
title: Marker v. Greenberg, 313 N.W.2d 4 (Minn. 1981)
---

# Marker v. Greenberg, 313 N.W.2d 4 (Minn. 1981)

Summary: Theodore Marker hired attorney Robert Greenberg for estate
planning services. Among other things, Greenberg prepared deeds
conveying real estate to Marker and his son as joint tenants. When
Marker died, the real estate was subject to estate tax. Marker's son
sued Greenberg for malpractice, alleging that if the real estate had
been conveyed as tenants in common, it would not have been subject to
estate tax. The trial court granted Greenberg's motion for summary
judgment and the appeals court




affirmed, holding that Marker's son lacked an attorney-client
relationship with Greenberg, and could not bring a malpractice action as
a beneficiary of the estate because he received the property.

SCOTT, Justice.

This is an appeal from an order of the Hennepin County District Court in
a legal malpractice action brought by the surviving joint tenant against
the attorney who drafted the deed. By that order the trial court granted
respondent Robert Greenberg's motion for summary judgment on the
grounds that plaintiff could not bring the action absent an
attorney-client relationship and that the six-year statute of
limitations barred the action since the statutory period began to run in
1973 when the alleged negligence occurred. We affirm.

For purposes of this appeal, the facts are uncontested. Appellant's
father, Theodore Marker, retained respondent, an attorney, for estate
planning services. In December 1972 respondent prepared a will for
appellant's father. In August 1973, on behalf of appellant's father,
respondent drafted deeds which conveyed certain real estate to
appellant's father and appellant as joint tenants.

Appellant's father died on December 24, 1977. Because the real estate in
question was held by appellant and his father as joint tenants, its
entire value, $120,000, was included in the decedent's gross estate for
tax purposes.

Appellant asserts that, if he and his father had held the real estate as
tenants in common, $20,858.18 in federal and state taxes would have
been saved. Appellant commenced this action to recover the amount of the
additional estate taxes, claiming the loss resulted from respondent's
negligence in not having the real estate conveyed into tenancy in
common.

Appellant was never a client of respondent. Appellant does not allege
that he was a beneficiary of his father's estate with respect to this
property, but that he was a surviving joint tenant.

The trial court granted summary judgment in favor of the respondent and
dismissed the complaint. Therefore, the issue arises as to whether a
surviving joint tenant has a cause of action for malpractice against the
attorney who drafted the joint tenancy deeds when the surviving joint
tenant was never a client of the attorney.

The general rule in legal malpractice is that an attorney is liable for
professional negligence only to a person with whom the attorney has an
attorney-client relationship and not, in the absence of special
circumstances such as fraud or improper motive, to anyone else. Courts
have recognized exceptions, however, where strict privity is not
required. Exceptions are frequently found in cases involving drafting or
executing a will.

Many courts have followed the lead of the California Supreme Court,
which declared in Lucas v. Hamm, that an intended beneficiary may bring
an action for legal malpractice against the




decedent's attorney where the attorney's negligent act caused the
named beneficiary to lose the intended bequest.

The relaxation of the strict privity requirement is very limited,
however. Especially in probate proceedings, this stringent restriction
is a necessity to prevent a myriad of causes of action. The will cases
listed above which follow Lucas v. Hamm are all situations in which the
attorney by his actions produced an instrument that failed to carry out
the testamentary intent of the testator, either by faulty drafting or by
improper attestation. The cases extending the attorney's duty to
non-clients are limited to a narrow range of factual situations in which
the client's sole purpose in retaining an attorney is to benefit
directly some third party. As stated by the Iowa Supreme Court in Brody
v. Ruby, "It is clear, however, that the third party, in order to
proceed successfully in a legal malpractice action, must be a direct and
intended beneficiary of the lawyer's services."

In determining the extent of an attorney's duty to a non-client, courts
frequently consider the factors expressed by the Lucas court:

The determination whether in a specific case the defendant will be held
liable to a third person not in privity is a matter of policy and
involves the balancing of various factors, among which are the extent to
which the transaction was intended to affect the plaintiff, the
foreseeability of harm to him, the degree of certainty that the
plaintiff suffered injury, the closeness of the connection between the
defendant's conduct and the injury, and the policy of preventing future
harm.

Applying these factors to the deed drafted by respondent for
appellant's father reveals that the respondent owed no duty to
appellant. This is not a case where the property did not pass to the
intended recipient upon the death of the testator. The deed was
effective at the time it was recorded in 1973. There was no invalidity
in the deed. Appellant does not allege that the disposition of the
property was contrary to the intent of his father. The benefit which
Theodore Marker wished to give to his son was the joint ownership of the
property, and this was accomplished by the documents.

The facts of Bucquet v. Livingston, to which appellant compares his
situation, are distinguishable. In Bucquet, the beneficiaries of an
inter vivos trust alleged professional negligence by the defendant
attorney in drafting the trust agreement. The complaint alleged that the
attorney was employed to plan the settlor's estate and to carry out his
intent that the nonmarital half of the trust principal would ultimately
pass to the beneficiaries free of estate taxes after his wife's death.
Because the attorney negligently included a general power of appointment
in the instrument, additional taxes were imposed which reduced the
corpus of the trust passing to the beneficiaries. In that case the
express purpose of the trust was minimization of taxes. No such purpose
is alleged in the instant case. In Bucquet the desired savings in taxes
failed because of the faulty drafting by the attorney. In the present
case, there is no allegation that the deed as drafted failed to
accomplish the objective of the client as expressed to the respondent.




The facts of the instant case are more similar to those of Hiemstra v.
Huston. In that case the court recognized the exception established in
earlier California cases holding an attorney liable to an intended
beneficiary for defects in drafting of a will. The court nevertheless
held that the complaint failed to state a cause of action in the
allegations that under a will drafted by the defendant attorneys the
plaintiff son received a smaller bequest than he would have received
under an earlier will of testator. The court noted that plaintiff did
not assert any legal deficiency in the will, nor did plaintiff assert
either as a conclusion or by allegation of ultimate facts that the will
failed to reflect the intent of the testator. The court concluded that
if plaintiff was deprived of a substantial part of his father's estate,
it was the result not of any negligence on the part of the defendant
attorneys but of the testator's intention as expressed in the valid
document.

In the case before us, the objective of the deed was to transfer
ownership of the real estate to joint tenancy between the father and the
son. The complaint alleges no invalidity in the documents and no
conflict of the result with decedent's intentions. The estate taxes
that were due at Theodore Marker's death were the natural result of the
form of ownership chosen by the decedent and not the result of any
negligence by respondent. In this case summary judgment was proper. We
therefore need not discuss the disputed application of the statute of
limitations.
---
lang: en
title: "Questions:"
---

# Questions:

8. Why didn't Marker have an attorney-client relationship with
Greenberg?

8. Was Greenberg negligent? Would Marker's father have had a
malpractice action against Greenberg?

8. Who is the real party in interest: Marker or his father's estate?
Why did Marker's father choose joint tenancy rather than tenancy in
common? What outcome was Marker's father trying to accomplish? Did
Greenberg help him achieve that outcome? All else being equal, do you
think Marker's father would have wanted to minimize the tax?
---
lang: en
title: Breach of Duty
---

# Breach of Duty

If an attorney-client relationship exists, then the attorney owes
certain legal duties to the client.

In order to prevail in a malpractice action, the plaintiff must prove
that the attorney breached one of those legal duties. However, different
duties have different liability standards. For example, the duty of care
requires attorneys to exercise reasonable care under the circumstances.
But the duty of loyalty requires absolute loyalty.

Equitania Ins, v. Slone & Garrett, 191 S.W.3d 552 (Ky. 2006)

Summary: Attorney Laurel Garrett represented Vimont in an effort to
prevent Pavenstedt from gaining control of Equitania Insurance. Vimont
filed a malpractice claim against Garrett, alleging that she provided
unsound advice. The trial court instructed the jury that attorneys are
not liable for errors of judgment, and the jury found for Garrett.

The Supreme Court reversed, holding that attorneys must exercise
ordinary care under the circumstances.




WINTERSHEIMER, Justice.

This appeal is from an opinion of the Court of Appeals which affirmed a
judgment of the circuit court based on a summary judgment/jury verdict
that rejected the claim of the Equitania Insurance Company and its
Vimont shareholder group for legal malpractice against Garrett and her
law firm.

The major issues are whether the proper standard for proving liability
in a legal malpractice case was followed and whether the instructions
given by the trial judge to the jury regarding specific factual issues
violated the rule in favor of barebones jury instructions.

Two groups of shareholders, the Vimont group, composed of four of the
shareholders, and the Pavenstedt group, composed of a group of
shareholders led by Johann Pavenstedt began to vie for control of
Equitania, an insurance company which provided insurance for horse
owners.

After the Vimont group bought out the Pavenstedt group, the company
continued to decline in its efforts to return a profit. Vimont
eventually entered an agreement to sell the book of business to Markel
Insurance Company. That deal was closed in January 1995. In March of
that year, the Vimont group filed a civil action in circuit court,
seeking to rescind the agreement between them and the Pavenstedt group.
That case was assigned to Fayette Circuit Judge Gary Payne. A judgment
was rendered against the Vimont group and it was upheld by the Court of
Appeals in an unpublished opinion.

Laurel Garrett and the law firm of Slone & Garrett represented the
Vimont group in its attempt to gain control of the company prior to
Vimont buying the shares of Pavenstedt. As a result of that
representation, Vimont filed a civil action against Garrett in circuit
court in February of 1997, alleging legal malpractice by Garrett in
connection with her representation. That case was assigned to Fayette
Circuit Judge John R. Adams and it is the principal subject of this
appeal. Judge Adams ruled against Vimont and the Court of Appeals upheld
that decision. This appeal followed.

This case is a complex legal malpractice claim brought by Vimont against
Garrett alleging that she negligently advised them during the midst of
the shareholder dispute. They claim that Garrett negligently failed to
properly advise them as to how to retain control of the corporation;
that the methods she advised violated the insurance code; violated a
fiduciary duty to shareholders; was unethical, and was substantially
more expensive. The circuit judge granted Garrett a partial summary
judgment based on his interpretation of the contract which was different
from the interpretation made by the circuit judge in the earlier civil
case. The other portion of the claim was resolved in favor of Garrett by
a jury verdict. The Court of Appeals upheld the decision of the circuit
court, and this Court granted discretionary review.

I. Jury Instructions




Correct instructions are absolutely essential to an accurate jury
verdict. The fundamental function of instructions is to tell the jury
what it must believe from the evidence in order to resolve each
dispositive factual issue in favor of the party who has the burden of
proof on that issue.

We should note it is well recognized that the function of instructions
is only to state what the jury must believe from the evidence. There
should not be an abundance of detail but the jury instructions should
provide only the "bare bones" of the question for the jury. The bare
bones may then be fleshed out by counsel during closing argument.

The jury instructions given by the trial court over the objection by
Vimont were not an accurate statement of the law regarding legal
malpractice in Kentucky. Vimont objected to the instructions and
tendered instructions of their own which were not used. The instructions
given follow:

Instruction No. 2: It was the duty of Defendant, Laurel Garrett, in
undertaking the legal representation of the plaintiffs, to possess to an
ordinary extent the technical knowledge commonly possessed in her
profession, to exercise that degree of care and skill which an ordinary,
reasonably competent lawyer would exercise under the same or similar
circumstances. Provided, however, a lawyer cannot be held responsible
for errors in judgment or for advising a course of action even if that
course of action ultimately proves to be unsuccessful.

The given instructions were incorrect for several reasons. It was
properly preserved because there was an objection to Instruction No. 2
in the submitted instructions.

Kentucky law does not provide for an exception for attorney liability
for errors in judgment. A case relied on by the Court of Appeals,
Daugherty v. Runner, stated that misjudgment of the law will generally
not render a lawyer liable. However, Daugherty did not state that a
lawyer can never be held liable for an error in judgment. The tendered
instructions did not advise the jury that it had to be an error of law
which precluded liability, nor did it inform the jury that there are
circumstances in which misjudgment of the law could be a basis for
liability. There can be many circumstances in which lawyers can commit
errors of judgment which deviate from the standard of care. Whether an
error of judgment is legal malpractice is a question of fact for the
jury.

Vimont offered an expert, Manning Warren, to evaluate the methods
undertaken by Garrett to assist the company in its shareholders dispute.
Specifically, Warren testified that Garrett should have pursued an
administrative process with the Department of Insurance to join the
Vimont group to the Pavenstedt agreement which, if successful, would
have resulted in the shareholders maintaining control of Equitania and
would have resolved the issue. This would have avoided a prolonged
battle with Pavenstedt and would have avoided spending over two million
dollars by buying the stock. They also would have avoided the issues
with the Department of Insurance regarding change of control as a result
of their purchase. It was their conclusion that Garrett committed
ongoing malpractice by failing to advise them of change of control
issues. Warren further testified that it was a deviation to fail to
pursue this option.




However, it is apparently undisputed that the Department of Insurance
would not have approved a Pavenstedt sale even if it had been properly
submitted.

Kentucky should not allow lawyers to avoid liability for committing
errors in judgment which the average reasonably prudent lawyer would not
commit. Any avoidance of liability should only be allowed for errors of
judgment made in absolute good faith.

Here, Garrett failed to plead or present evidence regarding her alleged
errors in judgment so as to justify her decision. The error in judgment
instruction indirectly required the jury to define and understand
abstract legal principles. The jury could not have reasonably understood
the distinction between errors in judgment and legal malpractice. It is
of interest to note that the instruction provided by Vimont in this case
is similar to the instructions provided in Daugherty.

The properjury instruction must follow a form similar to that in Palmore
:

It was the duty of Defendant in undertaking the legal representation of
Plaintiff to exercise the degree of care and skill expected of a
reasonably competent lawyer acting under similar circumstances. If you
are satisfied from the evidence that Defendant failed to comply with
this duty and that such failure was a substantial factor causing the
loss, you will find for Plaintiff; otherwise you will find for
Defendant.

This instruction form contains the elements prescribed in Daugherty
without requiring the jury to understand abstract legal principles. The
jury is able to determine from the evidence whether there was a breach
of duty and whether that breach caused the loss.

Consequently, under the circumstances regarding the instructions, this
matter is reversed and remanded. The decisions of the Court of Appeals
and the trial court are reversed and this matter is remanded to the
trial court for a jury determination as to all factual issues.
---
lang: en
title: "Questions:"
---

# Questions:

8. Why was Garrett's advice unsound? What was her defense?

8. How should juries evaluate malpractice claims alleging violations of
the duty of care? What is the correct standard of liability?
---
lang: en
title: Causation of Harm
---

# Causation of Harm

Clients can recover for malpractice only if their attorney's negligence
was both the "factual" or "but for" cause and proximate cause of a
legally cognizable harm. An attorney who is negligent but causes no harm
is not liable for malpractice.

Courts typically apply the "suit within a suit" or "trial within a
trial" doctrine to legal malpractice actions. Under this doctrine, the
factfinder must determine not only how the attorney's breach of duty
affected the action, but also how the action would have ended without
the breach of duty.




In other words, the client must prove that the attorney's breach of duty
caused a foreseeably worse outcome.

Accordingly, an attorney is not liable for malpractice if the client's
injury was inevitable. For example, an attorney who negligently fails to
file an action with no chance of success is not liable for negligence.
But what if the action had a small chance of success? And what if the
action had no chance of success, but still had settlement value?

In an action for transactional malpractice, the client must prove that
the attorney's breach of duty caused a worse outcome than non-breach
would have caused. For example, the client could show that alternative
actions would have produced a better result.

The client must also prove that the attorney's negligence was the
proximate cause of the injury. In other words, the plaintiff must
provide that a reasonable attorney under the circumstances would have
foreseen the injury.

In theory, causation is a straightforward concept. Attorneys are liable
for malpractice only if their actions caused a harm that they could have
foreseen. But in practice, causation of harm and foreseeability can be
difficult to determine in the face of diverse probabilities and
uncertain counterfactuals.

For example, consider the following scenarios:

- The attorney advises the client not to accept a $10,000 settlement
for a $100,000 damages claim, and the jury rules for the defendant.

- The attorney advises the client not to accept a $10,000 settlement
for a $100,000 damages claim, and the judge grants the defendant's
motion for summary judgment.

- The attorney advises the client not to accept a $10,000 settlement
for a $100,000 damages claim, and the judge grants the defendant's
motion to dismiss.

- Before discovery, the attorney advises the client not to accept a
$10,000 settlement for a $100,000 damages claim before discovery.
After discovery, the client accepts a $5,000 settlement.

- The attorney advises the client to accept a $10,000 settlement for a
$100,000 damages claim, and the client later obtains a $50,000
settlement.

- The attorney advises the client to accept a $10,000 settlement for a
$100,000 damages claim. The client accepts the settlement, but could
have obtained a $20,000 settlement.

In each of these circumstances, has the attorney caused a foreseeable
harm?
---
lang: en
title: Daugherty v. Runner, 581 S.W.2d 12 (Ky. Ct. App. 1978)
---

# Daugherty v. Runner, 581 S.W.2d 12 (Ky. Ct. App. 1978)

Summary: Lula Daugherty Roach died in the hospital after a car accident.
Runner represented Roach's estate, and filed an action against the other
driver, but not against the hospital. The estate eventually hired
another attorney to file a medical malpractice




action, but it was barred by the statute of limitations. The estate
filed a malpractice action against Runner for failing to file a medical
malpractice action. The jury found for Runner, but also held that the
estate would have recovered $146k in a medical malpractice action. The
court of appeals affirmed, holding that Runner did not necessarily
violate the duty of care.

HAYES, Judge.

This appeal is from a judgment entered pursuant to a jury verdict which
exonerated the appellee, an attorney, from the charges of legal
malpractice. The charges of the legal malpractice claim arose from a
medical malpractice cause of action on behalf of the deceased, Lula
Daugherty Roach. This type of action is commonly referred to as a "suit
within a suit." The basis for the legal malpractice claim is that
appellee Runner, while representing the deceased Roach for injuries
sustained in an automobile accident, failed to pursue a medical
malpractice claim by the estate of Roach against the hospital where
Roach was treated for her injuries after her accident and against the
doctors who treated her, until her claim was barred by the statute of
limitations.

The jury found for Runner on the legal malpractice claim and
additionally found that the appellant would have recovered on the
medical malpractice case, if suit had been timely filed, in the amount
of $146,123.75. Both parties appealed.

The appellant contends that the trial court erred in submitting the
issue of Runner's negligence to the jury and in failing to instruct the
jury properly.

Appellee's cross-appeal is of a protective nature wherein it is
contended that if we reverse the trial court based on appellant's
assignments of error, then appellee believes the jury verdict awarding
appellant $146,123.75 on his medical malpractice claim is erroneous
because of improperly admitted evidence.

We will not reach the claim of appellee on cross-appeal since we affirm
the judgment of the lower court.

On February 22, 1972, Mrs. Roach and her husband Russell were involved
in an automobile accident near Richmond, Kentucky. After receiving
emergency medical treatment in Richmond, Mrs. Roach was transferred to
St. Joseph Hospital in Lexington, Kentucky. She was admitted on February
22, 1972, under the care of an orthopedic doctor, George Gumbert, Jr.
Mrs. Roach died in the hospital on March 17, 1972. The official cause of
death listed on the certificate of death was bronchial pneumonia due to,
or as a consequence of, generalized peritonitis and bacterial
endocarditis. On the date of Mrs. Roach's death, her husband Russell,
individually and as executor of the estate of Mrs. Roach, entered into a
contract with attorney Runner to the effect that Runner was to
"institute a claim for damages against any and all responsible parties
as a result of injuries received upon the 22nd day of February, 1972."
The contract was a standard contract approved by the Louisville Bar
Association.




A later contract, dated July 28, 1973, was entered into between James
Russell Roach and another attorney, whereby this "second attorney" was
to represent Roach, individually and as administrator of the estate of
Lula Roach, in the medical malpractice claim. James Russell Roach was a
nonresident, so the present appellant, Byrd E. Daugherty, was appointed
ancillary administrator.

Suit was filed on August 1, 1973, in Fayette Circuit Court on behalf of
Daugherty by his present attorney, against St. Joseph Hospital and
others based on the medical malpractice claim. The trial court in that
case granted a summary judgment against Daugherty and the estate of Lula
Roach because the suit was not filed within the period of limitations.

Runner testified he was not hired to represent the estate of Lula Roach
on a medical malpractice claim; made an investigation of the facts
surrounding the auto accident; filed suit on same in Federal Court for
the Eastern District of Kentucky at Lexington against the driver of the
other auto in the accident, and never suspected the possibility of a
medical malpractice claim.

Appellant contends it is what Runner did not do that makes him liable
for malpractice. It is asserted he did not examine the hospital records
until after the statute of limitations had run on any medical
malpractice claim, and that he never advised his client that he did not
handle medical malpractice cases. There was also testimony on behalf of
appellant that Russell Roach, who had died prior to the trial, had
telephoned Runner in January, 1973, inquiring of Runner the status of
any medical malpractice investigation Runner was conducting. Runner
denied ever having such a conversation. It is uncontradicted, however,
that appellant hired the "second attorney" on March 15, 1973, to
represent him in the medical malpractice claim against St. Joseph
Hospital and others.

The Fayette Circuit Court had determined that the statute of limitations
began to run on the medical malpractice claim "on March 17, 1972, and
certainly no later than July 20, 1972, when the record of the
decedent's treatment was fully complete." From the evidence in the
record and the legal briefs filed on behalf of the parties, it is
unclear why the second attorney, who accepted a retainer fee, did not
file the medical malpractice claim within the period of time permitted
by the statute and case law of this Commonwealth.

The appellant contends that the trial court erred in (1) submitting the
question of the attorney's negligence to the jury; (2) allowing an
expert opinion to be presented to the jury based upon improper evidence;
and, (3) in failing to instruct the jury that the fact that other hired
counsel might have been able to toll the statute of limitations was no
defense to appellee Runner.

The standard of care is generally composed of two elements---care and
skill. The first has to do with care and diligence which the attorney
must exercise. The second is concerned with the minimum degree of skill
and knowledge which the attorney must display.




In determining whether that degree of care and skill exercised by the
attorney in a given case meets the requirements of the standard of care
aforementioned, the attorney's act, or failure to act, is judged by the
degree of its departure from the quality of professional conduct
customarily provided by members of the legal profession.

As it would be in negligence cases generally, the question of whether
the conduct of the attorney meets the standard of care test is one for
the trier of the facts to determine.

Having determined that the standard of care an attorney owes his client
is not that of a "reasonable man" under the circumstances, but is that
care and skill as men of the legal profession commonly, or ordinarily,
possess and exercise under the circumstances, and having determined that
this is generally a question for the trier of the facts, we look now at
the facts of the instant case.

The appellant Daugherty contends the trial court erred in submitting the
negligence of appellee Runner to the jury. He in effect is saying he,
Daugherty, was entitled to a directed verdict on this point because
Runner was negligent as a matter of law.

Appellant was required to prove in the legal malpractice suit (1) that
Runner was employed by appellant; (2) that he neglected his duty to
exercise the ordinary care of a reasonably competent attorney acting in
the same or similar circumstances; and (3) that such negligence resulted
in and was the substantially contributing factor in the loss to the
client.

The appellant has presented two theories in support of his argument that
he was entitled to a directed verdict on the question of Runner's
negligence. The first is that Runner was retained to bring all possible
legal actions resulting from the injuries and death of Mrs. Roach,
including a medical malpractice action, if appropriate, and that he
failed to carry out this duty. This argument is clearly without merit.
The written contract between the parties recited that Runner was
retained "to institute a claim for damages against any and all
responsible parties, as a result of injuries received upon the 22 day of
February, 1972." While there was some testimony about a conversation
with Runner regarding a medical malpractice action, the evidence was
disputed on that matter, and the question of whether Runner had any duty
to handle any medical malpractice case was certainly one for the jury.

Appellant's second theory in support of his directed verdict argument
seems to be that even if Runner was not employed specifically to pursue
a medical malpractice action, that he nevertheless had a duty to obtain
and examine the medical records of the patient, to investigate the
treatment procedures administered to her, and to inform his client that
there may have been some question about the medical care and treatment
she received, but that he did not handle medical malpractice. Appellee's
contention on this issue is simply that Mr. Runner was not retained
under the contract to handle a medical malpractice case, and he
therefore had no duties in that regard.




We are not ready to hold that Mr. Runner had absolutely no duties to his
client with regard to a medical malpractice action simply because the
written contract did not specifically mention a malpractice suit. To do
so would require the client, presumably a layman who is unskilled in the
law, to recognize for himself all potential legal remedies. An attorney
cannot completely disregard matters coming to his attention which should
reasonably put him on notice that his client may have legal problems or
remedies that are not precisely or totally within the scope of the task
being performed by the attorney.

On the other hand, we certainly cannot say that Mr. Runner was
neglectful as a matter of law. There was considerable testimony
concerning Runner's negligence, or lack of it. There was expert
testimony from two attorneys, one for each side.

Runner's testimony, in summary, was that he was hired to represent the
Roaches only for the injuries Mrs. Roach sustained as a result of the
automobile collision of February 22nd. He testified that he did not
handle medical malpractice claims because he was not competent to do so.
He had never processed one. He testified that the fact Mrs. Roach
entered the hospital with, according to the hospital admission report,
multiple contusions and abrasions, a fractured nose, fractured right
shoulder and a compressed fracture of the spine, and that she died in
the hospital some thirty (30) days later, did not arouse his suspicion
of a medical malpractice claim. He did not review the hospital records
until he filed the wrongful death action on behalf of Mrs. Roach in
Federal Court in Lexington, Kentucky, on June 9, 1972. Runner's law
associate, who actually reviewed the medical records on June 9, 1972,
testified the records were incomplete as there was no autopsy report in
the medical records on June 9th.

Runner further testified that no one representing the deceased Mrs.
Roach ever called to his attention the possibility of a medical
malpractice claim until the "second attorney" previously mentioned
contacted him some few days before the statute of limitations ran on the
medical malpractice claim. Runner's testimony was that he told this
other attorney to "go ahead" with the medical malpractice claim.

Appellant offered proof that Runner was contacted by members of Mrs.
Roach's family concerning the medical malpractice case long before the
statute ran. They were concerned with what Runner was doing about the
medical malpractice case. The appellant produced expert testimony from a
local lawyer to the effect that Runner's failure to inquire into the
cause of death of Mrs. Roach and his failure to review the medical
records was not consistent with good legal practice and, in fact, was a
substantial departure therefrom.

The other important testimony was that the Roach family, including
Daugherty, a brother of Mrs. Roach, had discussed, among themselves, the
medical malpractice case as early as December, 1972. They had in fact
contacted two attorneys in Lexington, who declined the case. They were
aware of the statute of limitations.

The family then proceeded to northern Kentucky, where on March 15, 1973,
they employed the "second attorney" to represent the estate in the
medical malpractice case. He filed no complaint.




Some time after July 28, 1973, he turned the case over to the
appellant's current attorney, who on August 1, 1973, filed a medical
malpractice claim in Fayette Circuit Court which was subsequently
dismissed as barred by the statute of limitations.

Under these circumstances the question of whether Runner had exercised
the degree of care and skill expected of a reasonably competent attorney
was a question for the jury to decide.

This is true especially in light of the fact that there was disputed
testimony concerning whether the possibility of a medical malpractice
action had been discussed with Runner.

The issue of Runner's negligence was submitted to the jury under the
following instructions:

8. It was the duty of the defendant, E. Michael Runner, Attorney at
Law, in undertaking the legal representation of the Estate of Lula
Daugherty Roach, to exercise that degree of care and skill expected of a
reasonably competent lawyer acting in the same or similar circumstances
about which you have heard evidence, and this general duty, included the
following specific duties:

(a. Not to undertake representation in a legal matter in which he knew
or should have known he was not competent without associating with
himself a lawyer that was competent to handle it;

(a. Not to undertake representation in a legal matter without
preparation adequate in the circumstances.

8. The Jury will answer the following interrogatory: Do you believe
from the evidence that the defendant, E. Michael Runner, failed in one
or more of the duties imposed upon him by instruction number 4, and such
failure was the substantial factor in the Estate of Lula Daugherty Roach
not recovering the award set out in instruction number 3 and
incorporated in Verdict A?

Nine of the jurors answered the question in the negative. While we may
have found differently had we sat as jurors in this case, we believe
there is sufficient evidence to support this jury's verdict, and we
therefore will not disturb it. Based upon the conflicting evidence, we
fail to see how Runner was negligent as a matter of law.

We note that the trial court's instruction mistakenly required the jury
to find that Runner's breach of duty, if any, was "the" substantial
factor in the plaintiffs failure to recover. The instruction should have
read, "a" substantial factor. However, the trial court was not made
aware of the error by objection, and it has not been raised on appeal,
nor could it be. For this reason we are not able to review the question.
In any event, it does not appear to be so substantial as to have caused
the plaintiff any prejudice.

In conclusion, we would add that we do agree somewhat with a statement
appellant makes in his well-written brief. Appellant states thusly:




Perhaps the issue that is involved in this case is far beyond the
instant action, and must be laid at the doors of the Bar as a whole and
more specifically, appellee. Maybe we, as a profession, have not
discharged our responsibility to inform the public as a whole, and more
specifically, Mr. Roach, that we specialize and limit our practice.
However, in the end result, the effect on the client is the same; the
public expects, and has the right to demand, that their legal affairs
will be approached with expertise and initiative and anything short of
that is a violation of the trust and confidence reposed in a member of
our profession.

To that, we would simply repeat that all the evidence in this case was
submitted to a jury of twelve citizens of this community, nine of whom
found for the attorney. Even though we may have found differently had we
sat as jurors in this case, we cannot disturb their verdict, as it was
sufficiently supported by the evidence.
---
lang: en
title: "Questions:"
---

# Questions:

8. What was the harm to Roach's estate? Could Runner have prevented
that harm? Could anyone else have prevented the harm?

8. What was the error in the jury instructions? Do you agree with the
court's conclusion that the error was not prejudicial?

TIG Ins, v. Giffin Winning Cohen & Bodewes, 444 F. 3d 587 (7th Cir.
2006)

Summary: Giffin Winning represented Illinois State University in a
gender discrimination action, and failed to produce three gender equity
studies to Joel Bellows, attorney for the plaintiffs. Soon afterward,
TIG and Latham & Watkins took over ISU's defense. Soon afterward,
Gorrell gave Bellows the studies and claimed they were based on a
nonexistent database. Bellows moved to sanction Giffin Winning and ISU
for not producing the database, and TIG paid Latham & Watkins $1.2
million to defend ISU. The action ultimately settled, and TIG filed a
malpractice action against Giffin Winning for failing to produce the
studies. The district court dismissed the action, and the circuit court
affirmed, holding that TIG failed to allege proximate cause because the
injury was not foreseeable.

EVANS, Circuit Judge.

TIG Insurance Company appeals the dismissal of its malpractice case
against the Giffin Winning law firm and one of its attorneys, Carol
Hansen Posegate.

To explain the malpractice claim we must reach back to the underlying
lawsuit, in which Giffin Winning, at least for a time, represented
Illinois State University (ISU) in a class-action, genderdiscrimination
lawsuit brought by several female professors. In the suit, the
plaintiffs contended that they were being paid less than male professors
and that ISU retaliated against female professors who complained about
the discrimination. Their attorney was Joel Bellows. TIG was




ISU's liability insurer at the time and it paid the attorney fees which
are at the heart of the present malpractice action; TIG, in turn, was
reimbursed by its reinsurers.

The malpractice alleged in the present case arose out of discovery
problems in the case. The major problem involved Giffin Winning's
failure to produce three documents called gender equity studies (two of
which are at issue here) in their response to a discovery request. The
response was signed in October 1996. A month later the case was stayed.
Soon thereafter, the law firm of Latham & Watkins filed an appearance on
behalf of ISU and essentially took control of ISU's defense, though
Giffin Winning remained of record. Latham had an attorney-client
relationship with ISU's insurer TIG. Giffin Winning did not.

The facts show that Giffin Winning received two gender equity studies
from ISU in 1994---while the Varner case was still pending before the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Two years later, when the law
firm received the second request for documents, the subject of the
October 1996 response at issue here, they routed the request to William
Gorrell, the former executive director for Information Systems and the
head of the Planning Policy department at ISU. He did not at that time
forward the studies to Giffin Winning for production and the law firm
did not produce them on its own. On this point, Judge Mihm later said
that Gorrell was the one who "dropped the ball entirely."

During the stay in the case, Bellows talked with Gorrell, who by then
was no longer employed by ISU and had his own lawsuit pending against
the school for wrongful termination. He independently provided Bellows
with the gender equity studies. He also executed an affidavit detailing
particulars of a "planning policy database" on which he said the studies
were based.

Once the stay was lifted, Bellows confronted Latham with the studies.
(The Latham firm was now representing ISU). Bellows demanded that ISU
turn over the database on which he alleged the studies were based.
Apparently thinking the best defense is a good offense, Latham's first
response apparently was to point fingers, saying Bellows had also not
adequately complied with discovery requests. Also at this time, Latham
began preparing a motion to disqualify Bellows for improperly soliciting
privileged information from Gorrell.

For his part, Bellows filed a motion for sanctions against both ISU and
Giffin Winning, in part based on the failure to produce the gender
equity studies. As relevant here, Bellows' contention in his motion for
sanctions was not simply that the studies were not produced. After all,
he now had the studies. Rather, he claimed that the gender equity
studies were not produced because of a conspiracy to hide the "Planning
Policy database." To have produced the studies, he argued, "would have
alerted the Varner plaintiffs to the existence of the databases."

We now arrive at the essence of the case---the pivotal facts about the
database. At a 4-day hearing on the pending motions, Gorrell testified
that the database contained variables relevant to the issue of gender
equity and was maintained in a format which enabled a user to prepare
comparative studies. He testified that the gender equity studies were
prepared from this database. He said he had done one of the studies
himself, though he also said he had never




personally accessed the database. The actual data processing, he said,
was done by his research assistant, Anna Wells, and her preparation of
the data for his 1994 study would have taken her no more than a day or
two using the database:

Q How long did it take Anna Wells to compile the information for the
1994 study?

A It could be done in a day or two.

That apparently was news to Wells. She testified that she did not use
any database in compiling the data.

Q Ms. Wells, when you collected the information reflected in these
tables, was there a single source that you could go to to collect all
the information reflected in the tables?

A No.

Q Was there a single database maintained by the Planning Policy
department that contained all of the information reflected in these
tables?

A No.

She used hard copy (probably the same 279 banker boxes of material which
had, in fact, been produced to Bellows), and it took her "a few weeks,
several weeks" to locate the information and format it for use. Why?
Because, as Judge Mihm found, there was no database and never had been:

I don't believe that the plaintiffs have ever established the existence
of the kind of database that I thought was being alleged here, that
there was some button at ISU that could be punched that would involve a
print-out of all this information. That clearly is not true. The
nonexistence of the database---which Bellows said there was an alleged
conspiracy to hide---is not seriously contested.

Nevertheless, Judge Mihm sanctioned Giffin Winning $10,000 for
discovery lapses, a sanction which was later vacated. Judge Mihm,
however, wisely denied Bellows' request for a default judgment based on
the failure to produce the gender equity studies. He remarked that "I
don't believe it was appropriate---but even if I had ordered that, I
think that would have been reversed on appeal." In addition, although he
denied Latham's motion to disqualify Bellows because of his contact
with Gorrell, Judge Mihm sanctioned Bellows $10,000 as well.

Ultimately, the case was settled; mercifully, we think.

We now get to the present malpractice action that TIG filed against
Giffin Winning in which the damages TIG alleges are the attorney fees it
paid Latham to defend against the sanction motion---a whopping $1.2
million, give or take, for the work of 27 attorneys and various
paralegals. It seems that when Latham said it took the motion seriously,
it meant it. As we said, TIG paid the bill and was subsequently
reimbursed by its reinsurers.

The elements of a legal malpractice action in Illinois are well-settled.
They are: "(1) the existence of an attorney-client relationship that
establishes a duty on the part of the attorney; (2)




a negligent act or omission constituting a breach of that duty; (3)
proximate cause; and (4) damages." A legal malpractice case is similar
to any other negligence claim, and traditional principles apply.
Proximate cause describes two distinct requirements---cause in fact
and legal cause. Cause in fact exists only if the defendant's conduct
was a "material element and a substantial factor in bringing about the
injury." Legal cause, on the other hand, is largely a question of
foreseeability. The relevant inquiry is whether "the injury is of a type
that a reasonable person would see as a likely result of his or her
conduct." The occurrence must have been "reasonably" foreseeable: "Not
what actually happened, but what the reasonably prudent person would
then have foreseen as likely to happen, is the key to the question of
reasonableness."

This is not the same as (but, in this case, necessarily a bit difficult
to distinguish from) a determination as to whether the fees themselves
are reasonable. For purposes of proximate cause, if the fees do not
reflect work reasonably, foreseeably related to the negligence alleged
in the case, it does not matter that in some other sense they might be
"reasonable." We draw this distinction in response to TIG's argument,
that because the fees were paid, they are prima facie reasonable. In
this situation, we find the argument breathtaking, say nothing of
irrelevant.

Proximate cause is the issue on which this case falters. Having said
that, we recognize that the Illinois courts indicate that proximate
cause should ordinarily be decided not as a matter or law, but by a
trier of fact. However, in a situation in which it is clear as a matter
of law that the injury could not have been foreseeable, Illinois courts
have upheld summary judgment on the issue. The situation before us is
such a case.

The fundamental negligence allegedly committed by Giffin Winning was a
failure to produce documents---especially gender equity studies ---
pursuant to a discovery request. The attorneys had routed the request to
Gorrell, who was at that point still employed by ISU. He did not forward
the studies to the attorneys. However, the attorneys had copies of the
studies, which they also failed to produce. This is a clear breakdown of
the discovery process, which we infer was not going at all smoothly on
either side of this case.

In this all-too-common situation, the question for us is whether it
would be reasonably foreseeable that a failure to produce these
documents would result in the injury alleged here. Could the attorneys
foresee that Gorrell, who failed to produce the documents when they
turned the request over to him, would then, after he became disgruntled
with ISU, independently provide the documents to Bellows? Beyond that,
would reasonable people foresee that Gorrell would mislead Bellows about
a database which did not exist? Would reasonable people then think that,
upon hearing Gorrell's story, Bellows' first impulse would be to move
for sanctions including default judgment in the case? Would reasonable
people foresee that, next, a large law firm, apparently thinking of
Judge Mihm as a bit trigger-happy, would jump into high gear out of fear
of default judgment and launch an army of 27 attorneys, plus paralegals,
to defend against the possibility that Judge Mihm might grant default
judgment on the basis of an alleged conspiracy to hide something which
does not exist? In other words, was the Latham response to a failure to
produce documents and the resulting injury foreseeable?




We think it was not as a matter of law. Our point can be illustrated by
a very different sort of negligence action. In Abrams, the city failed
to send an ambulance for a woman, Abrams (of course), who was in labor.
A friend, who then drove her to the hospital, ran a red light and
collided with a car driven by a drug-and-alcohol-impaired driver with a
suspended license. Abrams was seriously injured and spent 2 weeks in a
coma; sadly, her baby died. The court found, however, that as a matter
of law there was no proximate cause. The city could not have foreseen
the situation that unfolded. Perhaps a bit callously, the court remarked
that "millions of women in labor make it safely to the hospital each
year by private transportation."

It is also true---though less tragically so---that countless
failures to produce documents occur in the federal courts every year.
That is not a good thing. But we are not at a point at which it is
foreseeable that such a failure will spawn a million-dollar bill for
attorney fees. If it were, litigation would become more of a blood sport
than it already is. Lawyers would be even more obsessive about
irrelevant and tedious details. No good could come of it.

There is, in fact, nothing which distinguishes the failure to produce in
this case with countless others. Judge Mihm himself made this point in
response to Bellows' argument that this was the worst discovery abuse he
had ever seen. Judge Mihm said:

But you said in your 34 years of practice this was the most shocking
thing you had ever seen in terms of this discovery issue. I wonder what
kind of practice you've had if that's the case because, boy, in the
scheme of things, I've seen things 50 times worse than this.

What is foreseeable as a result of a failure to produce documents is the
reasonable procedure set out in Civil Rule of Civil Procedure 37, which
provides for sanctions only after other reasonable efforts to work out
disagreements fail. It may be that, as Judge Mihm also said, that did
not happen enough in this case. But ISU and Giffin Winning could hardly
be expected to foresee all this trouble over a phantom database. Why
would they? It was ISU's alleged database and Giffin Winning was
representing ISU at the time. They knew of no database; they were hiding
no database; there was no database. For Giffin Winning's carelessness
in failing to produce documents (which Bellows had in his possession),
the sanction of $10,000 might well have been sustained on appeal. But
as a matter of law, the injury alleged here was not reasonably
foreseeable.
---
lang: en
title: "Questions:"
---

# Questions:

8. What was TIG's injury? Did Giffin Winning's negligence cause that
injury?

8. Why did the court hold that TIG's injury was not reasonably
foreseeable? Was TIG's injury a reasonably foreseeable risk?
---
lang: en
title: Damages
---

# Damages




The plaintiff in a legal malpractice action can only recover actual
damages, and can only recover damages that were reasonably foreseeable
by the defendant. As a consequence, the plaintiff must prove the amount
of damages, and cannot recover speculative damages.
---
lang: en
title: Kituskie v. Corbman , 714 A. 2d 1027 (Pa. 1998)
---

# Kituskie v. Corbman , 714 A. 2d 1027 (Pa. 1998)

Summary: Kituskie was injured by Trapp in a car accident while on
vacation in California. He returned home to Pennsylvania and hired
attorney Corbman to represent him in a tort action. Corbman negligently
failed to file an action within California's two-year statute of
limitations, and advised Kituskie to file a legal malpractice action.
Trapp's insurance policy had a $25,000 maximum, but the jury awarded
Kituskie $2.3 million in damages against Corbman. The appellate court
vacated the judgment and remanded, holding that the jury must consider
the collectability of damages, and that the defendant bears the burden
of proof that damages are not collectable. The Supreme Court affirmed.

CASTILLE, Justice.

This Court granted allocatur in this matter in order to address two
issues. The first issue is whether the collectibility of damages in an
underlying action is relevant to and, therefore, admissible in a legal
malpractice action. The second issue is, if collectibility of damages
should be considered, which party bears the burden of proving
collectibility. Because we find that collectibility of damages in the
underlying action should be considered in a legal malpractice action and
that the defendant/attorney bears the burden of proof, we affirm the
order of the Superior Court and remand for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.

The facts relevant to this appeal are not in dispute. Leo J. Kituskie is
a Pennsylvania resident who is a practicing periodontist. On September
3, 1989, Kituskie was injured in a two-car automobile accident during
his vacation in San Jose, California. The traffic collision report for
the accident stated that a vehicle being driven by Evan Mark Trapp
crossed a highway on-ramp into the path of Kituskie's automobile after
it struck a curb and a cyclone fence. The traffic collision report also
indicated that Trapp was driving while intoxicated and that his vehicle
was being operated at the time of the accident at a high rate of speed.
After the accident, Kituskie returned to the Philadelphia area in order
to begin treatment for his injuries. As a result of this automobile
accident, Kituskie avers that he suffers from a degenerative and
arthritic back condition which makes it difficult for him to work
full-time as a periodontist.

On September 9, 1989, Kituskie retained Scott K. Corbman, Esquire, to
pursue his claim against Trapp for the personal injuries he sustained in
the accident. Corbman is an attorney licensed to practice law in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and is a principal/shareholder in the law
firm of Garfinkle, Corbman, Greenberg and Jurikson, P.C.

Corbman proceeded to obtain Kituskie's medical reports. After reviewing
the medical reports, Corbman made a claim on Kituskie's behalf against
Trapp's insurance carrier, California State




Automobile Association ("CSAa.). During settlement negotiations with
CSAA, Corbman learned that Trapp's insurance policy had a limit of
$25,000.

On September 17, 1990, more than one year after the accident, Corbman
discovered that the California statute of limitations for injuries such
as those suffered by Kituskie was only one year as opposed to the
two-year statute of limitations in Pennsylvania. CSAA ultimately
informed Corbman that it would not make a settlement offer to Kituskie
because the one-year statute of limitations had passed without Corbman
instituting a formal legal action. As soon as Corbman learned this
information, Corbman met with Kituskie and informed him that his claim
had been terminated because no suit was filed or settlement reached
within the one-year statute of limitations period. During this meeting,
Corbman advised Kituskie to seek the services of another attorney in
order to assert a legal malpractice claim against Corbman and the
Garfinkle firm.

On August 28, 1991, Kituskie, represented by new counsel, filed a legal
malpractice claim against Corbman and the Garfinkle law firm in the
Montgomery County Court of Common Pleas. Immediately prior to jury
selection, counsel for each side filed motions in limine requesting that
each side be precluded from presenting expert testimony on the issue of
CSAA possibly settling the matter within the policy limits of Trapp's
policy. Neither of these motions dealt directly with the issue of
whether the jury in this legal malpractice action could consider
Kituskie's ability to collect on an underlying judgment against Trapp.
However, the trial court, realizing that its resolution of whether
collectibility of damages in an underlying case could be an issue at
trial, withheld its disposition of the two motions in limine. On January
6, 1995, prior to commencing the trial in this matter, the trial court
decided that collectibility of damages in an underlying case was not
relevant to a legal malpractice claim in Pennsylvania. Thus, the trial
court granted both motions in limine.

Following a trial on the matter, on January 11,1995, a jury found that
Corbman and the Garfinkle firm were liable to Kituskie for legal
malpractice in the amount of $2,300,000. Corbman and the Garfinkle firm
appealed to the Superior Court. The Superior Court, in a published
opinion, vacated the judgment and remanded for further proceedings
because it held that the collectibility of damages in an underlying case
should be considered in a legal malpractice action. The Superior Court
also held that the attorney being sued for legal malpractice bore the
burden of proving as a defense in the form of mitigation of damages that
the potential underlying case which formed the basis of the legal
malpractice award would have been uncollectible. This Court granted
allocatur in order to decide whether collectibility should be part of a
legal malpractice action and, if so, which party bears the burden of
proof as to that issue.

In order to establish a claim of legal malpractice, a
plaintiff/aggrieved client must demonstrate three basic elements:

8. employment of the attorney or other basis for a duty;

8. the failure of the attorney to exercise ordinary skill and
knowledge; and

8. that such negligence was the proximate cause of damage to the
plaintiff.




An essential element to this cause of action is proof of actual loss
rather than a breach of a professional duty causing only nominal
damages, speculative harm or the threat of future harm. Damages are
considered remote or speculative only if there is uncertainty concerning
the identification of the existence of damages rather than the ability
to precisely calculate the amount or value of damages. In essence, a
legal malpractice action in Pennsylvania requires the plaintiff to prove
that he had a viable cause of action against the party he wished to sue
in the underlying case and that the attorney he hired was negligent in
prosecuting or defending that underlying case (often referred to as
proving a "case within a case").

A review of case law in the Commonwealth shows that the issue of whether
collectibility of damages in an underlying case should also be a part of
a legal malpractice action is one of first impression. Other
jurisdictions, however, have addressed this issue and have held that
collectibility of damages should also be considered in a legal
malpractice action.

Like these other jurisdictions, this Court believes that collectibility
of damages in the underlying action should also be part of the analysis
in a legal malpractice action. We do so because we recognize that a
legal malpractice action is distinctly different from any other type of
lawsuit brought in the Commonwealth. A legal malpractice action is
different because, as described above, a plaintiff must prove a case
within a case since he must initially establish by a preponderance of
the evidence that he would have recovered a judgment in the underlying
action (here, the underlying action would have involved Kituskie's
lawsuit against Trapp). It is only after the plaintiff proves he would
have recovered a judgment in the underlying action that the plaintiff
can then proceed with proof that the attorney he engaged to prosecute or
defend the underlying action was negligent in the handling of the
underlying action and that negligence was the proximate cause of the
plaintiff's loss since it prevented the plaintiff from being properly
compensated for his loss. However, this Court has held that the
plaintiff in a legal action should only be compensated for his actual
losses. Actual losses in a legal malpractice action are measured by the
judgment the plaintiff lost in the underlying action and the attorney
who negligently handled the underlying action is the party held
responsible for the lost judgment. However, as noted by the Superior
Court, "it would be inequitable for the plaintiff to be able to obtain a
judgment against the attorney which is greater than the judgment that
the plaintiff could have collected from the third party; the plaintiff
would be receiving a windfall at the attorney's expense." Thus, we now
hold that collectibility of damages in the underlying case is a matter
which should be considered in legal malpractice actions.

Because this Court has concluded that collectibility of damages is an
issue which should be considered in legal malpractice actions, we now
must decide who bears the burden of proof. While other jurisdictions
considering the issue of collectibility of damages have unanimously
concluded that collectibility is a part of a legal malpractice action,
they have been split on which party in the legal malpractice action
bears the burden of proof. A majority of courts in other jurisdictions
have placed the burden of proving collectibility on the plaintiff
because it is viewed as being closely related to the issue of proximate
cause, a burden which clearly the plaintiff bears as part of his prima
facie case. In doing so, these courts place the burden on the plaintiff




because a plaintiff can prove that the attorney's malfeasance was the
proximate cause of his loss only if he demonstrates that he would have
succeeded on the underlying action and that he would have succeeded in
collecting on the resulting judgment.

A minority of courts in other jurisdictions, however, have rejected the
majority's line of reasoning and placed the burden of proving
non-collectibility on the defendant/attorney. These courts have
recognized that the plaintiff must prove a case within a case. These
minority of courts, however, do not believe that it logically follows
from the case within a case burden of proof that the plaintiff must also
prove that the damages in the underlying case would have been
collectible. Instead, these courts believe that the burden of proof in a
legal malpractice action only requires the plaintiff to prove a loss of
judgment on a valid claim. To require the plaintiff to also prove
collectibility of damages would result in placing an unfair burden on
the plaintiff where the plaintiffs legal malpractice action is often
brought years after the initial accident causing his injuries solely
because the defendant/lawyer failed to act in a timely and competent
manner. Thus, the minority of courts believe that it is more logical and
fair to treat collectibility as an affirmative defense which the
defendant/attorney must plead and prove in order to avoid or mitigate
the consequences of that attorney's negligent acts. Moreover, this
minority has criticized the majority position because it ignores the
possibility of settlement between the plaintiff and the underlying
tortfeasor and also overlooks that the passage of time itself can be a
militating factor either for or against collectibility of the underlying
case.

After considering both positions, this Court finds the reasoning of the
minority position to be more persuasive. Thus, we adopt the minority
position and hold that a defendant/lawyer in a legal malpractice action
should plead and prove the affirmative defense that the underlying case
was not collectible by a preponderance of the evidence.

Accordingly, for the reasons expressed above, we find that the Superior
Court correctly held that collectibility of damages in an underlying
case is a matter which must be considered in a legal malpractice action
and that the defendant/lawyer bears the burden of proving that the
underlying case which formed the basis of the damages award in a legal
malpractice action would not have been fully collectible. Therefore, the
order of the Superior Court is affirmed and the matter remanded for
further proceedings.
---
lang: en
title: "Questions:"
---

# Questions:

8. Why did the court hold that Kituskie could only recover collectable
damages? Why couldn't he recover all of his damages?

8. Why did the court hold that Corbman bore the burden of proving that
damages were not collectable? Will it be hard for Corbman to prove the
damages were not collectable, under the circumstances?



---
lang: en
title: "3.3: Ineffective Assistance of Counsel Ineffective Assistance of
  Counsel"
---
