# 3.1: Fiduciary Duties

Attorneys are fiduciaries of their clients. As fiduciaries, they have
certain legal duties to their clients, which include:

- The Duty of Care: Ordinary care under the circumstances.

- The Duty of Loyalty: Absolute loyalty.

- The Duty of Impartiality: Absolute candor.

- The Duty of Confidentiality: Absolute confidentiality.

The duties of care, loyalty, impartiality, and confidentiality attach
whenever an attorney-client relationship begins and may continue after
an attorney-client relationship ends. Accordingly, attorneys may owe
duties to both current and former clients, which may affect an
attorney's ability to continue representing those clients or to
represent new clients.
---
lang: en
title: The Duty of Care
---

# The Duty of Care

Attorneys must exercise reasonable care when representing their clients.
Typically, courts expect attorneys to use the degree of care expected of
an ordinary attorney in similar circumstances. In other words, the duty
of care imposed on an attorney is a duty of professional care,
reflecting the expectations of both the client and other attorneys. An
attorney who fails to exercise reasonable care is negligent, and may be
liable in tort for malpractice. Attorneys may have a duty of care to
both current and former clients, and any negligent act in relation to
representation of a client may create a malpractice claim.

In order to prove a malpractice claim for a breach of the duty of care,
the plaintiff must show that a duty of care existed, the attorney
breached the duty of care, and the breach caused a harm to the
plaintiff. Of course, a duty of care exists only if an attorney-client
relationship exists. So the first element of a malpractice claim for
negligence is proving the existence of an attorney-client relationship.
---
lang: en
title: The Duty of Loyalty
---

# The Duty of Loyalty

Attorneys are fiduciaries of their clients because clients justifiably
vest confidence, good faith, reliance, and trust in their attorneys.
Accordingly, attorneys have a fiduciary duty to maintain an undivided
loyalty to their clients at all times. Attorneys must ensure that their
duties to their clients never conflict with their own financial
interests, the interests of another client, or any other interest that
would affect their ability to provide competent and diligent
representation.

Under the duty of loyalty, attorneys cannot represent anyone with an
interest adverse to one of their clients, because it would create a
conflict of interest. If that interest becomes an issue, the attorney's
loyalty would be divided between the two clients. Obviously, an attorney
cannot




represent two parties with interests directly adverse to each other,
like opposing parties in litigation, because the conflict of interest is
fundamental and unavoidable. MR 1.7, cmt. [8., But the restriction
imposed by the duty of loyalty applies more broadly. Any adverse or
potentially adverse interest may create a conflict of interest, even if
that interest is not yet at issue.
---
lang: en
title: The Duty of Impartiality
---

# The Duty of Impartiality

As fiduciaries of their clients, attorneys have a duty to provide candid
and impartial advice. In order to satisfy the duty of impartiality,
attorneys must be able to exercise their independent professional
judgment, without any conflicts of interest. If a client's interests are
adverse or potentially adverse to the attorney's interests or the
interests of another client, a conflict of interest exists that will
compromise the attorney's impartiality. Under those circumstances,
attorneys will have an incentive to provide advice that benefits
themselves or their other clients, and withhold advice that does not.
Even if the client is not harmed by the advice itself, the client is
harmed by not receiving candid and impartial advice reflecting the full
range of available options.

For example, if an attorney represents a client in a contract
negotiation, and the outcome of the negotiation could affect the
interests of another client, a conflict of interest exists, because the
attorney has an incentive to provide advice that will benefit the other
client and withhold advice that will harm the other client. Even if the
advice benefits both clients, the client receiving the advice is harmed
by not receiving candid and impartial advice. Likewise, if an attorney
both represents and has a financial interest in a corporation, a
conflict of interests exists, because the attorney has an incentive to
provide advice that will benefit the attorney's investment and withhold
advice that will not, depriving the client of the full range of options.
---
lang: en
title: "Model Rule 2.1: Advisor"
---

# Model Rule 2.1: Advisor

In representing a client, a lawyer shall exercise independent
professional judgment and render candid advice. In rendering advice, a
lawyer may refer not only to law but to other considerations such as
moral, economic, social and political factors, that may be relevant to
the client's situation.
---
lang: en
title: The Duty of Confidentiality
---

# The Duty of Confidentiality

As fiduciaries of their clients, attorneys also have a duty to maintain
the confidentiality of private information disclosed to them by their
clients. Under the duty of confidentiality, attorneys must never
disclose confidential client information to a third party not bound by
the duty of confidentiality or use confidential client information to
benefit themselves or another client. Clients are entitled to confide in
their attorney, secure in the knowledge that the confidential
information they disclose cannot be used against them.

If a client's interests are adverse or potentially adverse to the
attorney's interests or the interests of another client, a conflict of
interests exists that will compromise the attorney's ability to




maintain confidentiality. Under those circumstances, attorneys have an
incentive to use the confidential information for their own benefit or
the benefit of their other client. Even if the client is not harmed by
the use of the confidential information, the client is harmed by the
betrayal of trust.
---
lang: en
title: "Model Rule 1.6: Confidentiality of Information"
---

# Model Rule 1.6: Confidentiality of Information

a. A lawyer shall not reveal information relating to the representation
of a client unless the client gives informed consent, the disclosure is
impliedly authorized in order to carry out the representation or the
disclosure is permitted.
---
lang: en
title: Limitations on the Duties of an Attorney
---

# Limitations on the Duties of an Attorney

While the absolute duties of loyalty, impartiality, and confidentiality
are the quintessence of professional responsibility, they are
necessarily observed in the breach. Taken literally, they would
inevitably preclude attorneys from ever representing more than one
client. It is always possible that the interests of a potential client
will conflict with those of a current client. It is always possible that
advice given to one client will affect the interests of another client.
And it is always possible that confidential information disclosed by one
client will be relevant to another.

In practice, the duties of an attorney must yield to the practical
realities of representation.

Accordingly, the duties of attorneys are shaped by the rights of
clients, attorneys, and the bar. Clients are entitled to hire the
attorney of their choice, and may consent to representation, despite a
formal conflict. Attorneys are entitled to represent more than one
client, so long as they disclose any conflicts and the client consents.
And the bar is entitled to prevent parties from using conflicts
strategically to disqualify opposing counsel.

In other words, clients may provide informed consent to certain
conflicts of interest. Attorneys may represent clients with conflicts of
interests under certain circumstances, so long as the clients provide
informed consent. And under certain circumstances, the bar may even
permit attorneys to represent parties with conflicting interests without
consent.

However, attorneys must always observe the duty of care. An attorney who
fails to exercise reasonable care under the circumstances is negligent
and potentially liable for malpractice, even if the client consents.

Ishmael v. Millington, 241 Cal. App. 2d 520 (Cal. Ct. App. 1966)

Summary: Earl F. Anders and Roberta Ishmael were married and owned a
trucking company. Eventually, they decided to divorce. Under California
law, Ishmael was entitled to 50% of the marital assets. Attorney Robert
Millington had previously represented Anders and his company. Anders
asked Millington to represent Ishmael. He agreed, and prepared a
settlement agreement that Ishmael signed. Ishmael was entitled to
$41,250, but under the agreement she received $8,807. Ishmael filed a
malpractice action, and




the trial court granted Millington's motion for summary judgment. The
appellate court reversed, holding that a jury could have found that
Millington breached his duty of care.

FRIEDMAN, J.

This is a legal malpractice action in which the plaintiff-client appeals
from a summary judgment granted the defendant-attorney. The factual
narrative will possess heightened significance against a backdrop of
general doctrine:

Actionable legal malpractice is compounded of the same basic elements as
other kinds of actionable negligence: duty, breach of duty, proximate
cause, damage. Touching the first element, duty, the general rule is
that "the attorney, by accepting employment to give legal advice or to
render other legal services, impliedly agrees to use such skill,
prudence, and diligence as lawyers of ordinary skill and capacity
commonly possess and exercise in the performance of the tasks which they
undertake."

In this case the defense is that the client sought no advice from the
attorney and was given none; by the client's express admission, she did
not rely on the attorney, thus, that her alleged damage was not
proximately caused by the attorney's cause of action.

The facts are presented by summary judgment affidavits, which include
extracts from depositions. There is no significant conflict in the
evidence. Roberta Ishmael, the plaintiff, was formerly married to Earl
F. Anders. The couple had three children. They lived in Gridley, where
Mr. Anders was a partner in a family trucking business. Domestic
difficulties resulted in a separation, and Mrs. Anders moved to
Sacramento where she secured employment. She and her husband agreed upon
a divorce and property settlement. She knew that she was entitled to
one-half the marital property.

Mr. Anders called upon defendant Robert Millington, a Gridley attorney
who had for some time represented him and his trucking firm. Mr.
Millington advised Anders that if he could establish adulterous conduct
by Mrs. Anders, he might be awarded more than one-half the community
property. For one reason or another there was a decision that the wife
rather than the husband would apply for divorce. At Anders' request Mr.
Millington agreed to act as the wife's attorney, to prepare the
necessary papers and to file a divorce action for her. He drew up a
complaint and a property settlement agreement and handed these documents
to Mr. Anders, who took them to Sacramento and had his wife sign them.
She knew that Mr. Millington had represented her husband in the past.
Faulty recall prevents ascertainment whether Mrs. Anders ever met
personally with the attorney before the papers were drawn. She did not
discuss the property settlement agreement with the attorney before she
signed it. Mr. Millington believed the divorce and property settlement
arrangements were "cut and dried" between the husband and wife; he
"assumed that she knew what she was doing;" he believed that she was
actually getting half the property but made no effort to confirm that
belief.




In her deposition the former Mrs. Anders testified that in signing the
complaint and property settlement agreement she relied solely on her
husband and did not rely on the attorney. Later, when so instructed, she
traveled to the courthouse at Oroville, where she and her corroborating
witness met Mr. Millington. He escorted her through a routine ex parte
hearing which resulted in an interlocutory divorce decree and judicial
approval of the property settlement.

According to her complaint, the former Mrs. Anders discovered that in
return for a settlement of $8,807 she had surrendered her right to
community assets totaling $82,500. Ascribing her loss to the
attorney's negligent failure to make inquiries as to the true worth of
the community property, she seeks damages equivalent to the difference
between what she received and onehalf the asserted value of the
community.

By the very act of undertaking to represent Mrs. Anders in an
uncontested divorce suit, Mr. Millington assumed a duty of care toward
her, whatever its degree. Described in terms traditionally applicable to
the attorney-client relationship, the degree of care exacted by that
duty was that of a figurative lawyer of ordinary skill and capacity in
the performance of like tasks.

The degree of care is related to the specific situation in which the
defendant found himself. The standard is that of ordinary care under the
circumstances of the particular case. A lawyer owes undivided loyalty to
his client. Minimum standards of professional ethics usually permit him
to represent dual interests where full consent and full disclosure
occur. The loyalty he owes one client cannot consume that owed to the
other. Most descriptions of professional conduct prohibit his
undertaking to represent conflicting interests at all; or demand that he
terminate the threeway relationship when adversity of interest appears.
Occasional statements sanction informed representation of divergent
interests in "exceptional" situations. Even those statements demand
complete disclosure of all facts and circumstances which, in the
attorney's honest judgment, may influence his client's choice, holding
the attorney civilly liable for loss caused by lack of disclosure.

Divorces are frequently uncontested; the parties may make their
financial arrangements peaceably and honestly; vestigial chivalry may
impel them to display the wife as the injured plaintiff; the husband may
then seek out and pay an attorney to escort the wife through the
formalities of adjudication. We describe these facts of life without
necessarily approving them. Even in that situation the attorney's
professional obligations do not permit his descent to the level of a
scrivener. The edge of danger gleams if the attorney has previously
represented the husband. A husband and wife at the brink of division of
their marital assets have an obvious divergence of interests.
Representing the wife in an arm's length divorce, an attorney of
ordinary professional skill would demand some verification of the
husband's financial statement; or, at the minimum, inform the wife that
the husband's statement was unconfirmed, that wives may be cheated,
that prudence called for investigation and verification. Deprived of
such disclosure, the wife cannot make a free and intelligent choice.
Representing both spouses in an uncontested divorce situation (whatever
the ethical implications), the attorney's professional obligations
demand no less. He may not set a shallow limit on the depth to which he
will represent the wife.




The general standard of professional care is appropriate to the garden
variety situation, where the attorney represents only one of several
parties or interests. It falls short of adequate description where the
attorney's professional relationship extends to two clients with
divergent or conflicting interests in the same subject matter. A more
specific statement of the same rule is needed to guide the fact trier to
the law's demands when the attorney attempts dual representation. In
short, an attorney representing two parties with divergent interests
must disclose all facts and circumstances which, in the judgment of a
lawyer of ordinary skill and capacity, are necessary to enable his
client to make free and intelligent decisions regarding the subject
matter of the representation.

In view of the degree of care imposed by law on an attorney in
defendant's position, a fact trier might reasonably find him negligent
in failing to disclose to plaintiff the limited representation she was
receiving and in failing to point to the possibility of independent
legal advice. The question of breach was thus a triable issue which
could not be resolved on a summary judgment motion.

Legal malpractice may consist of a negligent failure to act. The
attorney's negligence, whether consisting of active conduct or a
failure to act, need not be the sole cause of the client's loss. Here
the attorney is charged not with erroneous advice, but with failure to
advise, failure to investigate, failure to disclose. The wife's
reliance on her husband's alleged misrepresentations is not at all
inconsistent with the claim that her loss was the result of the
attorney's negligent failure. A jury might find that the husband's
misrepresentations were a realizable likelihood which made the
attorney's inaction negligent, thus forming a concurrent (and not
superseding) cause of harm. Causation was a jury question which could
not be resolved as a matter of law.

Contributory negligence on plaintiffs part was specially pleaded and, if
established, would bar malpractice recovery. Plaintiff, as she
testified, relied on her husband's list of assets; apparently did not
trouble to investigate or even to inquire whether she was getting her
share of property; was seemingly content to let her husband take charge;
accepted his attorney for the limited purpose of piloting her through
the divorce formalities. A court, however, cannot say that reasonable
jurors would inevitably characterize her conduct as contributory
negligence. That issue was a triable issue of fact.

Thus, notwithstanding the lack of conflict in the evidence, the summary
judgment rests on the determination of issues reserved for decision by a
fact trier and which could not be resolved as a matter of law. Since
triable issues of fact existed, the motion should have been denied.
---
lang: en
title: "Questions:"
---

# Questions:

8. Did Anders assert a violation of the duty of care, the duty of
loyalty, or both?

8. Did Anders show a violation of the duty of care, the duty of
loyalty, or both?

8. Could Anders have prevailed on a violation of either the duty of
care or the duty of loyalty?



---
lang: en
title: The Appearance of Impropriety
---

# The Appearance of Impropriety

Let this, my young Readers, be your constant Maxim, That no Man can be
good enough to enable him to neglect the Rules of Prudence; nor will
Virtue herself look beautiful, unless she be bedecked with the outward
Ornaments of Decency and Decorum. 39

The ABA has long held that judges should avoid "the appearance of
impropriety." When the ABA adopted the Canons of Judicial Ethics in
1924, Canon 4 held that judges should avoid "the appearance of
impropriety." When it adopted the Code of Judicial Conduct in 1972,
Canon 2 held that a judge should avoid "the appearance of impropriety in
all his actions." When it adopted the Model Code of Judicial Conduct in
1990, Canon 2A maintained the appearance of impropriety standard,
holding that "the test for the appearance of impropriety is whether the
conduct would create in reasonable minds a perception that the judge's
ability to carry out judicial responsibilities with integrity,
impartiality and competence is impaired." And Rule 1.2 of the revised
Model Rules of Judicial Conduct retains the same standard.

But lawyers have resisted applying the appearance of impropriety
standard to themselves.

When the ABA adopted the Model Code of Professional Responsibility in
1969, it included the appearance of impropriety standard only as an
"ethical consideration," rather than a "disciplinary rule," making it
aspirational, rather than mandatory. And when the ABA adopted the Model
Rules of Professional Conduct in 1983, it eliminated the appearance of
impropriety standard entirely.
---
lang: en
title: Model Code of Professional Responsibility
---

# Model Code of Professional Responsibility

Canon 9: A Lawyer Should Avoid Even the Appearance of Professional
Impropriety Ethical Consideration 9-2

Public confidence in law and lawyers may be eroded by irresponsible or
improper conduct of a lawyer. On occasion, ethical conduct of a lawyer
may appear to laymen to be unethical. In order to avoid
misunderstandings and hence to maintain confidence, a lawyer should
fully and promptly inform his client of material developments in the
matters being handled for the client. While a lawyer should guard
against otherwise proper conduct that has a tendency to diminish public
confidence in the legal system or in the legal profession, his duty to
clients or to the public should never be subordinate merely because the
full discharge of his obligation may be misunderstood or may tend to
subject him or the legal profession to criticism. When explicit ethical
guidance does not exist, a lawyer should determine his conduct by acting
in a manner that promotes public confidence in the integrity and
efficiency of the legal system and the legal profession.
---
lang: en
title: "Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers ยง 121(c)(iv):
  The perspective for determining conflict of interest"
---

# Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers ยง 121(c)(iv): The perspective for determining conflict of interest

Henry Fielding, The History of Tom Jones, A Foundling (1749).




This Section employs an objective standard by which to assess the
adverseness, materiality, and substantiality of the risk of the effect
on representation. The standard of this Section is not the "appearance
of impropriety" standard formerly used by some courts to define the
scope of impermissible conflicts. That standard could prohibit not only
conflicts as defined in this Section, but also situations that might
appear improper to an uninformed observer or even an interested party.

The propriety of the lawyer's action should be determined based only on
facts and circumstances that the lawyer knew or should have known at the
time of undertaking or continuing a representation. It should not be
evaluated in light of information that became known only later and that
could not reasonably have been anticipated.

The standard of this Section allows consideration in a given situation
of the social value of the lawyer's behavior alleged to constitute the
conflict. For example, a lawyer's statement about a matter of public
importance might conflict with a client's objectives, but the public
importance of free expression is a factor to be considered in limiting
the possible reach of the relevant conflicts rule.

Whether there is adverseness, materiality, and substantiality in a given
circumstance is often dependent on specific circumstances that are
ambiguous and the subject of conflicting evidence. Accordingly, there
are necessarily circumstances in which the lawyer's avoidance of a
representation is permissible but not obligatory. A lawyer also would be
justified in withdrawing from some representations in circumstances in
which it would be improper to disqualify the lawyer or the lawyer's
firm.
---
lang: en
title: "Model Code of Judicial Conduct: Canon 1 Rule 1.2: Promoting
  Confidence in the Judiciary"
---

# Model Code of Judicial Conduct: Canon 1 Rule 1.2: Promoting Confidence in the Judiciary

A judge shall act at all times in a manner that promotes public
confidence in the independence, integrity, and impartiality of the
judiciary, and shall avoid impropriety and the appearance of
impropriety.

RMle 1.2, Q&mro&ntj-S

The test for appearance of impropriety is whether the conduct would
create in reasonable minds a perception that the judge violated this
Code or engaged in other conduct that reflects adversely on the judge's
honesty, impartiality, temperament, or fitness to serve as a judge.

Bd. Of. Ed. Of. NY City v. Nyquist, 590 F. 2d 1241 (2d Cir. 1979)

Summary: The Board of Education of the City of New York used separate
seniority lists when deciding layoffs of male and female Health and
Physical Education teachers (HPETs). The Commissioner of Education held
that using separate lists was illegal, but




the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (HEW) disagreed,
arguing that merging the lists would violate Title IX by
disproportionately affecting women. The BoE filed a declaratory judgment
action against three male and three female HPETs. The male HPETs were
represented by James R. Sandner of New York State United Teachers
(NYSUT). The female HPETs filed a motion to disqualify Sandner, on the
ground that their union dues helped pay for his services. The district
court granted the motion, but the Second Circuit reversed, holding that
no conflict of interest existed, and that any appearance of impropriety
was insufficient to require disqualification.

Before FEINBERG, MANSFIELD and SMITH, Circuit Judges.

FEINBERG, Circuit Judge:

This unusual case presents difficult questions regarding the appropriate
role of federal courts when called upon by disqualification motions to
evaluate the conduct of attorneys who appear before them. Three male
Health and Physical Education teachers (HPETs) in the New York City
school system appeal from an order of the United States District Court
for the Southern District of New York, Morris E. Lasker, J.,
disqualifying their counsel upon the motion of three female HPETs.
Appellant male teachers claim that the order was an abuse of discretion
because it disregarded their constitutional rights, and was without any
sound basis. For reasons set forth below, we hold that the motion to
disqualify should have been denied, and we therefore reverse the order
of the district court.

The contending parties on appeal - the male and female HPETs - are all
defendants in this declaratory judgment action brought by the Board of
Education of the City of New York and the Chancellor of the City School
District. In February 1977, these plaintiffs found themselves in the
middle of apparently contradictory positions held by the Commissioner of
Education of the State of New York and the office of Civil Rights of the
Department of Health, Education and Welfare (HEW). In a case involving
one of these appellants, the State Commissioner had ruled that the use
of separate seniority lists for male and female HPETs for the purpose of
layoffs was illegal. Shortly thereafter, HEW initially indicated to the
Board that HEW took exactly the contrary view, that merger of the lists
would violate Title IX. Caught in this apparent dilemma, plaintiffs
provisionally merged the seniority lists of male and female HPETs and
commenced this action for a declaratory judgment in which all concerned
parties would be present. The complaint named as defendants HEW and its
Secretary, the New York State Commissioner of Education, the State
Division of Human Rights, three named male HPETs, individually and as
representatives of all male HPETs, and three named female HPETs,
individually and as representatives of all female HPETs. The male and
female defendants have asserted counterclaims and cross-claims. The
relief sought by plaintiffs is a judgment declaring that the provisional
policy of merging the seniority lists, effective February 1, 1977 but
not retroactively, is lawful.




The two classes of defendants are the actual contending parties in this
litigation. The male HPETs allege that maintaining separate seniority
lists for male and female HPETs is illegal and that:

all defendant male Health and Physical Education teachers who were laid
off on or after September 1, 1975, are entitled to reinstatement with
back pay and all other retroactive benefits incident to their positions
to the date of their layoff if less senior female teachers were retained
at that time or at any time thereafter.

The female HPETs allege that their seniority status perpetuates past
discriminatory practices of plaintiffs and that if the provisional
merged seniority list is used for layoff purposes "it will result in the
layoff of at least six times as many female HPETs as male HPETs." The
stakes in the lawsuit are obviously high.

The male HPETs are represented in this action by James R. Sandner, Esq.,
who is also General Counsel of New York State United Teachers (NYSUT).
That organization is an unincorporated membership association of
approximately 180,000 teachers, librarians, guidance counsellors and
other school related employees of the almost 800 school districts in New
York State. We are told that in each of the school districts there is a
separate local union, which is the exclusive bargaining representative
for employees in that unit. The majority of these individual unions have
chosen to affiliate themselves with NYSUT, but the latter does not
collectively bargain for any public employees. It does, however, provide
a number of services to its members, including a legal service program
under the direction and control of Mr. Sandner. Both the male and female
HPETs are represented in collective bargaining by the American
Federation of Teachers (AFT), to whom they pay dues. A portion of the
dues paid to the AFT is remitted to NYSUT, which, at least in part,
apparently finances the legal service program.

Under the program, NYSUT's members may apply to obtain legal
representation free of charge. Mr. Sandner and his staff may take an
applicant's case when, in their judgment, the claim is both job-related
and meritorious. It is through this procedure that the male defendants
retained Mr. Sandner as their attorney. NYSUT itself, however, has taken
no position on the merits or on any other issue in this litigation.

The female HPETs moved to disqualify Mr. Sandner as counsel for the male
HPETs or, in the alternative, to require NYSUT to furnish counsel for
the female teachers. Judge Lasker concluded that "the female teachers
are paying, in part, for their opponents' legal expenses." This violated
"at least the spirit, if not the letter, of Canon 9 of the Code of
Professional Responsibility that 'A lawyer should avoid even the
appearance of impropriety.'" Accordingly, the judge granted the motion
and this appeal by the male HPETs followed.

We begin the discussion by noting that, curiously, the power of the
federal courts to disqualify attorneys in litigation pending before them
has long been assumed without discussion, and attention has focused on
identifying the circumstances in which exercise of the power is
appropriate. Our reading of the cases in this circuit suggests that we
have utilized the power of




trial judges to disqualify counsel where necessary to preserve the
integrity of the adversary process in actions before them. In other
words, with rare exceptions disqualification has been ordered only in
essentially two kinds of cases: (1) where an attorney's conflict of
interests in violation of Canons 5 and 9 of the Code of Professional
Responsibility undermines the court's confidence in the vigor of the
attorney's representation of his client, or more commonly (2) where the
attorney is at least potentially in a position to use privileged
information concerning the other side through prior representation, for
example, in violation of Canons 4 and 9, thus giving his present client
an unfair advantage. In such cases, we note Chief Judge Kaufman's
oft-quoted admonition that,

When dealing with ethical principles, we cannot paint with broad
strokes. The lines are fine and must be so marked. Guideposts can be
established when virgin ground is being explored, and the conclusion in
a particular case can be reached only after a painstaking analysis of
the facts and precise application of precedent.

But in other kinds of cases, we have shown considerable reluctance to
disqualify attorneys despite misgivings about the attorney's conduct.
This reluctance probably derives from the fact that disqualification has
an immediate adverse effect on the client by separating him from counsel
of his choice, and that disqualification motions are often interposed
for tactical reasons. And even when made in the best of faith, such
motions inevitably cause delay. For example, this lawsuit has been at a
standstill now for close to a year.

Weighing the needs of efficient judicial administration against the
potential advantage of immediate preventive measures, we believe that
unless an attorney's conduct tends to "taint the underlying trial" by
disturbing the balance of the presentations in one of the two ways
indicated above, courts should be quite hesitant to disqualify an
attorney. Given the availability of both federal and state comprehensive
disciplinary machinery, there is usually no need to deal with all other
kinds of ethical violations in the very litigation in which they
surface.

With these thoughts in mind, we turn to the ethical problems presented
by the instant appeal. The district court disqualified Mr. Sandner
because a "layman's faith would be severely troubled" by the fact that
"the female teachers are paying, in part, for their opponents' legal
expenses." There is no claim, however, that Mr. Sandner feels any sense
of loyalty to the women that would undermine his representation of the
men. Nor is there evidence that his representation of the men is
anything less than vigorous. There is also no claim that the men have
gained an unfair advantage through any access to privileged information
about the women. Were there any such problem, the women would not be
asking, and the district judge would not have ordered, as an alternative
to disqualification of Mr. Sandner, that NYSUT pay their attorney's
fees. Thus, in no real sense can Mr. Sandner's representation of the
men be said to taint the trial.

We agree that there is at least some possibility that Mr. Sandner's
representation of the men has the appearance of impropriety, because of
the large number of union members involved and the public importance of
the civil rights issue at the heart of the dispute. But in any event,




we think that disqualification was inappropriate. We believe that when
there is no claim that the trial will be tainted, appearance of
impropriety is simply too slender a reed on which to rest a
disqualification order except in the rarest cases. This is particularly
true where, as in this case, the appearance of impropriety is not very
clear. We note that while on one hand there is an element of unfairness
to the women, on the other it seems probable that if NYSUT were to take
a position on the merits of this litigation, Mr. Sandner's
representation of the men would apparently be within the protection of
the "fair representatioa. cases. This means that the question whether
Mr. Sandner's conduct is unethical could be a very close one. Since
disqualification entails immediate disruption of the litigation, it is
better to relegate any questions about Mr. Sandner's conduct to other
appropriate proceedings. In addition to the possibility of grievance
proceedings and an internal union attack on the legal plan, it may be
that judicial construction of the plan, in an appropriate lawsuit, could
provide some relief for the women.

We therefore reverse the order of the district court disqualifying
counsel, and remand for continuation of the action.
---
lang: en
title: "Questions:"
---

# Questions:

8. Who does Sandner represent? Does he represent the female members of
the teachers union? Does he have any duties to the plaintiffs in this
action?

8. Why might someone be concerned about an appearance of impropriety
under these circumstances? Why did the court find that any appearance of
impropriety did not prevent Sandner from representing the male teachers?

8. Do you agree with the court's conclusion? Would you feel differently
if the male teachers were paying for their own representation? Would you
feel differently if the union provided representation for the female
teachers?
