**Section 2: The Attorney-Client Relationship**

**2.1: Creating an Attorney-Client Relationship**

*The rest of life pales in significance, I'm looking for somebody with
whom to dance. With whom to dance? With whom to dance? I'm looking for
somebody with whom to dance.*[1]

**Clients & “Quasi-Clients”**

Ideally, the formation of an attorney-client relationship involves
formalities like an engagement letter, a retainer agreement, and the
payment of attorney’s fees. But none of those formalities are necessary.
An attorney-client relationship may be formed whenever a person asks an
attorney for legal advice and the attorney provides it, so long as a
reasonable person could believe that an attorney-client relationship
existed.

I will refer to people an attorney intends to represent as “clients,”
and people an attorney does not intend to represent as “quasi-clients.”
An attorney has an “express attorney-client relationship” with clients
and an “implied attorney-client relationship” with quasi-clients. But
express and implied attorney-client relationships impose many of the
same duties on an attorney.

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><strong>Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers § 14 (2000)</strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>A relationship of client and lawyer arises when:</p>
<ol type="1">
<li><blockquote>
<p>a person manifests to a lawyer the person's intent that the lawyer provide legal services for the person; and either</p>
</blockquote></li>
</ol>
<ol type="a">
<li><blockquote>
<p>the lawyer manifests to the person consent to do so; or</p>
</blockquote></li>
<li><blockquote>
<p>the lawyer fails to manifest lack of consent to do so, and the lawyer knows or reasonably should know that the person reasonably relies on the lawyer to provide the services; or</p>
</blockquote></li>
</ol>
<blockquote>
<p>2. a tribunal with power to do so appoints the lawyer to provide the services</p>
</blockquote></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

.

**The Duties of an Attorney**

Attorneys owe certain legal duties to their clients and quasi-clients,
whether they have an express attorney-client relationship or an implied
attorney-client relationship. Those duties are reflected in the Model
Rules of Professional Conduct.

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><strong>Duty of Care</strong>:</th>
<th>Attorneys have a duty to act with due diligence in pursuit of their client’s interests.<a href="https://www.americanbar.org/groups/professional_responsibility/publications/model_rules_of_professional_conduct/rule_1_1_competence/"><u>Model Rule 1.1</u></a>.</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>Duty of Loyalty</strong>:</td>
<td>Attorneys may not represent any party with an interest adverse to any of their clients, and must refrain from self-dealing. <a href="https://www.americanbar.org/groups/professional_responsibility/publications/model_rules_of_professional_conduct/rule_1_7_conflict_of_interest_current_clients/"><u>Model Rules 1.7</u></a> <a href="https://www.americanbar.org/groups/professional_responsibility/publications/model_rules_of_professional_conduct/rule_1_8_current_clients_specific_rules/"><u>& 1.8</u></a>.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><strong>Duty of Impartiality</strong>:</td>
<td>Attorneys must provide their clients with all of the information their clients need in order to make informed decisions. <a href="https://www.americanbar.org/groups/professional_responsibility/publications/model_rules_of_professional_conduct/rule_1_4_communications/"><u>Model Rule 1.4</u></a>. Attorneys must also “exercise independent professional judgment and render candid advice.” <a href="https://www.americanbar.org/groups/professional_responsibility/publications/model_rules_of_professional_conduct/rule_2_1_advisor/"><u>Model Rule 2.1</u></a>.</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><strong>Duty of Confidentiality</strong>:</td>
<td>Attorneys must maintain in confidence all information obtained while representing their clients, and may not use any confidential client information in a way that could harm that client. <a href="https://www.americanbar.org/groups/professional_responsibility/publications/model_rules_of_professional_conduct/rule_1_6_confidentiality_of_information/"><u>Model Rule 1.6</u></a>.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><a href="https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=8498879200867285465"><strong><u><em>Togstad v. Vesely, Otto, Miller & Keefe</em>, 291 N.W.2d 686 (Minn. 1980)</u></strong></a></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><blockquote>
<p><strong>Summary:</strong> John Togstad was paralyzed after surgery. His wife Joan Togstad met with attorney Jerre Miller and asked him whether they had a viable medical malpractice action. Miller stated that he did not think his firm was interested, but he would consult with his partners. He did not charge Togstad or agree to represent her. He also did not inform her that he lacked experience in the area, encourage her to consult with another attorney, or warn her about the statute of limitations on medical malpractice actions. After the statute of limitations expired, the Togstads filed a legal malpractice action against Miller. The jury found that an attorney-client relationship existed and that Miller was negligent, and awarded damages to the Togstads. The Minnesota Supreme Court affirmed, holding that an attorney-client relationship existed because Miller’s statements caused Mrs. Togstad to believe that Mr. Togstad lacked a viable medical malpractice claim.</p>
</blockquote></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

This is an appeal by the defendants from a judgment of the Hennepin
County District Court involving an action for legal malpractice. The
jury found that the defendant attorney Jerre Miller was negligent and
that, as a direct result of such negligence, plaintiff John Togstad
sustained damages in the amount of $610,500 and his wife, plaintiff Joan
Togstad, in the amount of $39,000. Defendants (Miller and his law firm)
appeal to this court from the denial of their motion for judgment
notwithstanding the verdict or, alternatively, for a new trial. We
affirm.

In August 1971, John Togstad began to experience severe headaches and on
August 16, 1971, was admitted to Methodist Hospital where tests
disclosed that the headaches were caused by a large aneurysm on the left
internal carotid artery. The attending physician, Dr. Paul Blake, a
neurological surgeon, treated the problem by applying a Selverstone
clamp to the left common carotid artery. The clamp was surgically
implanted on August 27, 1971, in Togstad's neck to allow the gradual
closure of the artery over a period of days. The treatment was designed
to eventually cut off the blood supply through the artery and thus
relieve the pressure on the aneurysm, allowing the aneurysm to heal. It
was anticipated that other arteries, as well as the brain's collateral
or cross-arterial system would supply the required blood to the portion
of the brain which would ordinarily have been provided by the left
carotid artery. The greatest risk associated with this procedure is that
the patient may become paralyzed if the brain does not receive an
adequate flow of blood. In the event the supply of blood becomes so low
as to endanger the health of the patient, the adjustable clamp can be
opened to establish the proper blood circulation.

In the early morning hours of August 29, 1971, a nurse observed that
Togstad was unable to speak or move. At the time, the clamp was one-half
(50%) closed. Upon discovering Togstad's condition, the nurse called a
resident physician, who did not adjust the clamp. Dr. Blake was also
immediately informed of Togstad's condition and arrived about an hour
later, at which time he opened the clamp. Togstad is now severely
paralyzed in his right arm and leg, and is unable to speak.

Plaintiffs' expert, Dr. Ward Woods, testified that Togstad's paralysis
and loss of speech was due to a lack of blood supply to his brain. Dr.
Woods stated that the inadequate blood flow resulted from the clamp
being 50% closed and that the negligence of Dr. Blake and the hospital
precluded the clamp's being opened in time to avoid permanent brain
damage. Specifically, Dr. Woods claimed that Dr. Blake and the hospital
were negligent for (1) failing to place the patient in the intensive
care unit or to have a special nurse conduct certain neurological tests
every half-hour; (2) failing to write adequate orders; (3) failing to
open the clamp immediately upon discovering that the patient was unable
to speak; and (4) the absence of personnel capable of opening the clamp.

Dr. Blake and defendants' expert witness, Dr. Shelly Chou, testified
that Togstad's condition was caused by [blood
clots](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?entityType=disease&entityId=Icac9cf69475411db9765f9243f53508a&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Default))
going up the carotid artery to the brain. They both alleged that the
[blood
clots](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?entityType=disease&entityId=Icac9cf69475411db9765f9243f53508a&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.Default))
were not a result of the Selverstone clamp procedure. In addition, they
stated that the clamp must be about 90% closed before there will be a
slowing of the blood supply through the carotid artery to the brain.
Thus, according to Drs. Blake and Chou, when the clamp is 50% closed
there is no effect on the blood flow to the brain.

About 14 months after her husband's hospitalization began, plaintiff
Joan Togstad met with attorney Jerre Miller regarding her husband's
condition. Neither she nor her husband was personally acquainted with
Miller or his law firm prior to that time. John Togstad's former work
supervisor, Ted Bucholz, made the appointment and accompanied Mrs.
Togstad to Miller's office. Bucholz was present when Mrs. Togstad and
Miller discussed the case.

Mrs. Togstad had become suspicious of the circumstances surrounding her
husband's tragic condition due to the conduct and statements of the
hospital nurses shortly after the paralysis occurred. One nurse told
Mrs. Togstad that she had checked Mr. Togstad at 2 a. m. and he was
fine; that when she returned at 3 a. m., by mistake, to give him someone
else's medication, he was unable to move or speak; and that if she
hadn't accidentally entered the room no one would have discovered his
condition until morning. Mrs. Togstad also noticed that the other nurses
were upset and crying, and that Mr. Togstad's condition was a topic of
conversation.

Mrs. Togstad testified that she told Miller “everything that happened at
the hospital,” including the nurses' statements and conduct which had
raised a question in her mind. She stated that she “believed” she had
told Miller “about the procedure and what was undertaken, what was done,
and what happened.” She brought no records with her. Miller took notes
and asked questions during the meeting, which lasted 45 minutes to an
hour. At its conclusion, according to Mrs. Togstad, Miller said that “he
did not think we had a legal case, however, he was going to discuss this
with his partner.” She understood that if Miller changed his mind after
talking to his partner, he would call her. Mrs. Togstad “gave it” a few
days and, since she did not hear from Miller, decided “that they had
come to the conclusion that there wasn't a case.” No fee arrangements
were discussed, no medical authorizations were requested, nor was Mrs.
Togstad billed for the interview.

Mrs. Togstad denied that Miller had told her his firm did not have
expertise in the medical malpractice field, urged her to see another
attorney, or related to her that the statute of limitations for medical
malpractice actions was two years. She did not consult another attorney
until one year after she talked to Miller. Mrs. Togstad indicated that
she did not confer with another attorney earlier because of her reliance
on Miller's “legal advice” that they “did not have a case.”

On cross-examination, Mrs. Togstad was asked whether she went to
Miller's office “to see if he would take the case of (her) husband.” She
replied, “Well, I guess it was to go for legal advice, what to do, where
shall we go from here? That is what we went for.” Again in response to
defense counsel’s questions, Mrs. Togstad testified as follows:

> Q: And it was clear to you, was it not, that what was taking place was
> a preliminary discussion between a prospective client and lawyer as to
> whether or not they wanted to enter into an attorney-client
> relationship?

A: I am not sure how to answer that. It was for legal advice as to what
to do.

> Q: And Mr. Miller was discussing with you your problem and indicating
> whether he, as a lawyer, wished to take the case, isn't that true?

A: Yes.

On re-direct examination, Mrs. Togstad acknowledged that when she left
Miller's office she understood that she had been given a “qualified,
quality legal opinion that (she and her husband) did not have a
malpractice case.”

Miller's testimony was different in some respects from that of Mrs.
Togstad. Like Mrs. Togstad, Miller testified that Mr. Bucholz arranged
and was present at the meeting, which lasted about 45 minutes. According
to Miller, Mrs. Togstad described the hospital incident, including the
conduct of the nurses. He asked her questions, to which she responded.
Miller testified that “the only thing I told her (Mrs. Togstad) after we
had pretty much finished the conversation was that there was nothing
related in her factual circumstances that told me that she had a case
that our firm would be interested in undertaking.”

Miller also claimed he related to Mrs. Togstad “that because of the
grievous nature of the injuries sustained by her husband, that this was
only my opinion and she was encouraged to ask another attorney if she
wished for another opinion” and “she ought to do so promptly.” He
testified that he informed Mrs. Togstad that his firm “was not engaged
as experts” in the area of medical malpractice, and that they associated
with the Charles Hvass firm in cases of that nature. Miller stated that
at the end of the conference he told Mrs. Togstad that he would consult
with Charles Hvass and if Hvass's opinion differed from his, Miller
would so inform her. Miller recollected that he called Hvass a “couple
days” later and discussed the case with him. It was Miller's impression
that Hvass thought there was no liability for malpractice in the case.
Consequently, Miller did not communicate with Mrs. Togstad further.

On cross-examination, Miller testified as follows:

> Q: Now, so there is no misunderstanding, and I am reading from your
> deposition, you understood that she was consulting with you as a
> lawyer, isn't that correct?

A: That's correct.

> Q: That she was seeking legal advice from a professional attorney
> licensed to practice in this state and in this community?
>
> A: I think you and I did have another interpretation or use of the
> term “Advice”. She was there to see whether or not she had a case and
> whether the firm would accept it.
>
> Q: We have two aspects; number one, your legal opinion concerning
> liability of a case for malpractice; number two, whether there was or
> wasn't liability, whether you would accept it, your firm, two separate
> elements, right?

A: I would say so.

> Q: Were you asked in the deposition, “And you understood that she was
> seeking legal advice at the time that she was in your office, that is
> correct also, isn't it?” And did you give this answer, “I don't want
> to engage in semantics with you, but my impression was that she and
> Mr. Bucholz were asking my opinion after having related the incident
> that I referred to.” The next question, “Your legal opinion?” Your
> answer, “Yes.” Were those questions asked and were they given?
>
> MR. COLLINS: Objection to this, Your Honor. It is not impeachment.
>
> THE COURT: Overruled.
>
> THE WITNESS: Yes, I gave those answers. Certainly, she was seeking my
> opinion as an attorney in the sense of whether or not there was a case
> that the firm would be interested in undertaking.

Kenneth Green, a Minneapolis attorney, was called as an expert by
plaintiffs. He stated that in rendering legal advice regarding a claim
of medical malpractice, the “minimum” an attorney should do would be to
request medical authorizations from the client, review the hospital
records, and consult with an expert in the field. John McNulty, a
Minneapolis attorney, and Charles Hvass testified as experts on behalf
of the defendants. McNulty stated that when an attorney is consulted as
to whether he will take a case, the lawyer's only responsibility in
refusing it is to so inform the party. He testified, however, that when
a lawyer is asked his legal opinion on the merits of a medical
malpractice claim, community standards require that the attorney check
hospital records and consult with an expert before rendering his
opinion.

Hvass stated that he had no recollection of Miller's calling him in
October 1972 relative to the Togstad matter. He testified that:

> A: When a person comes in to me about a medical malpractice action,
> based upon what the individual has told me, I have to make a decision
> as to whether or not there probably is or probably is not, based upon
> that information, medical malpractice. And if, in my judgment, based
> upon what the client has told me, there is not medical malpractice, I
> will so inform the client.

Hvass stated, however, that he would never render a “categorical”
opinion. In addition, Hvass acknowledged that if he were consulted for a
“legal opinion” regarding medical malpractice and 14 months had expired
since the incident in question, “ordinary care and diligence” would
require him to inform the party of the two-year statute of limitations
applicable to that type of action.

This case was submitted to the jury by way of a special verdict form.
The jury found that Dr. Blake and the hospital were negligent and that
Dr. Blake’s negligence (but not the hospital’s) was a direct cause of
the injuries sustained by John Togstad; that there was an
attorney-client contractual relationship between Mrs. Togstad and
Miller; that Miller was negligent in rendering advice regarding the
possible claims of Mr. and Mrs. Togstad; that, but for Miller’s
negligence, plaintiffs would have been successful in the prosecution of
a legal action against Dr. Blake; and that neither Mr. nor Mrs. Togstad
was negligent in pursuing their claims against Dr. Blake. The jury
awarded damages to Mr. Togstad of $610,500 and to Mrs. Togstad of
$39,000.

On appeal, defendants raise the following issues:

\(1\) Did the trial court err in denying defendants' motion for judgment
notwithstanding the jury verdict?

\(2\) Does the evidence reasonably support the jury's award of damages
to Mrs. Togstad in the amount of $39,000?

\(3\) Should plaintiffs' damages be reduced by the amount of attorney
fees they would have paid had Miller successfully prosecuted the action
against Dr. Blake?

\(4\) Were certain comments of plaintiffs' counsel to the jury improper
and, if so, were defendants entitled to a new trial?

In a legal malpractice action of the type involved here, four elements
must be shown: (1) that an attorney-client relationship existed; (2)
that defendant acted negligently or in breach of contract; (3) that such
acts were the proximate cause of the plaintiffs' damages; (4) that but
for defendant's conduct the plaintiffs would have been successful in the
prosecution of their medical malpractice claim.

This court first dealt with the element of lawyer-client relationship in
the decision of [*Ryan v.
Long*](https://1.next.westlaw.com/Link/Document/FullText?findType=Y&serNum=1886004894&pubNum=594&originatingDoc=I0e47cb15ff2111d99439b076ef9ec4de&refType=RP&originationContext=document&transitionType=DocumentItem&contextData=(sc.UserEnteredCitation)).
The *Ryan* case involved a claim of legal malpractice and on appeal it
was argued that no attorney-client relationship existed. This court,
without stating whether its conclusion was based on contract principles
or a tort theory, disagreed:

> (I)t sufficiently appears that plaintiff, for himself, called upon
> defendant, as an attorney at law, for “legal advice,” and that
> defendant assumed to give him a professional opinion in reference to
> the matter as to which plaintiff consulted him. Upon this state of
> facts the defendant must be taken to have acted as plaintiff's legal
> adviser, at plaintiff's request, and so as to establish between them
> the relation of attorney and client.

More recent opinions of this court, although not involving a detailed
discussion, have analyzed the attorney-client consideration in
contractual terms. For example, the *Ronnigen* court, in affirming a
directed verdict for the defendant attorney, reasoned that “under the
fundamental rules applicable to contracts of employment the evidence
would not sustain a finding that defendant either expressly or impliedly
promised or agreed to represent plaintiff.”

The trial court here, in apparent reliance upon the contract approach
utilized in *Ronnigen* applied a contract analysis in ruling on the
attorney-client relationship question. This has prompted a discussion by
the Minnesota Law Review, wherein it is suggested that the more
appropriate mode of analysis, at least in this case, would be to apply
principles of negligence, *i.e.*, whether defendant owed plaintiffs a
duty to act with due care.

We believe it is unnecessary to decide whether a tort or contract theory
is preferable for resolving the attorney-client relationship question
raised by this appeal. The tort and contract analyses are very similar
in a case such as the instant one, and we conclude that under either
theory the evidence shows that a lawyer-client relationship is present
here. The thrust of Mrs. Togstad’s testimony is that she went to Miller
for legal advice, was told there wasn't a case, and relied upon this
advice in failing to pursue the claim for medical malpractice. In
addition, according to Mrs. Togstad, Miller did not qualify his legal
opinion by urging her to seek advice from another attorney, nor did
Miller inform her that he lacked expertise in the medical malpractice
area. Assuming this testimony is true, as this court must do, we believe
a jury could properly find that Mrs. Togstad sought and received legal
advice from Miller under circumstances which made it reasonably
foreseeable to Miller that Mrs. Togstad would be injured if the advice
were negligently given.

Thus, under either a tort or contract analysis, there is sufficient
evidence in the record to support the existence of an attorney-client
relationship.

Defendants argue that even if an attorney-client relationship was
established the evidence fails to show that Miller acted negligently in
assessing the merits of the Togstads' case. They appear to contend that,
at most, Miller was guilty of an error in judgment which does not give
rise to legal malpractice.

However, this case does not involve a mere error of judgment. The gist
of plaintiffs’ claim is that Miller failed to perform the minimal
research that an ordinarily prudent attorney would do before rendering
legal advice in a case of this nature. The record, through the testimony
of Kenneth Green and John McNulty, contains sufficient evidence to
support plaintiffs' position.

In a related contention, defendants assert that a new trial should be
awarded on the ground that the trial court erred by refusing to instruct
the jury that Miller's failure to inform Mrs. Togstad of the two-year
statute of limitations for medical malpractice could not constitute
negligence. The argument continues that since it is unclear from the
record on what theory or theories of negligence the jury based its
decision, a new trial must be granted.

The defect in defendants' reasoning is that there is adequate evidence
supporting the claim that Miller was also negligent in failing to advise
Mrs. Togstad of the two-year medical malpractice limitations period and
thus the trial court acted properly in refusing to instruct the jury in
the manner urged by defendants.

One of defendants' expert witnesses, Charles Hvass, testified:

> Q: Now, Mr. Hvass, where you are consulted for a legal opinion and
> advice concerning malpractice and 14 months have elapsed (since the
> incident in question), wouldn't and you hold yourself out as competent
> to give a legal opinion and advice to these people concerning their
> rights, wouldn't ordinary care and diligence require that you inform
> them that there is a two-year statute of limitations within which they
> have to act or lose their rights?

A: Yes. I believe I would have advised someone of the two-year period of
limitation, yes.

Consequently, based on the testimony of Mrs. Togstad, i. e., that she
requested and received legal advice from Miller concerning the
malpractice claim, and the above testimony of Hvass, we must reject the
defendants' contention, as it was reasonable for a jury to determine
that Miller acted negligently in failing to inform Mrs. Togstad of the
applicable limitations period.

Defendants also indicate that at the time Mrs. Togstad went to another
attorney (after Miller) the statute of limitations may not have run and
thus Miller's conduct was not a “direct cause” of plaintiffs' damages.
As they point out, the limitations period ordinarily begins to run upon
termination of the treatment for which the physician was retained.

There is other authority, however, which holds that where the injury
complained of consists of a “single act,” the limitations period
commences from the time of that act, even though the doctor-patient
relationship may continue thereafter. Consequently, the limitations
period began to run on either August 29, 1971, the date of the incident
in question, or October 6, 1971, the last time Dr. Blake treated Mr.
Togstad. Mrs. Togstad testified that she consulted another attorney “a
year after (she) saw Mr. Miller.” Thus, since she visited with Miller on
October 2, or 3, 1972, if Mr. Togstad's injuries resulted from a “single
act” the limitations period had clearly run by the time Mrs. Togstad
consulted another attorney. If, as defendants argue, the statutory
period commenced on the date of last treatment, October 6, and Mrs.
Togstad's testimony is taken literally, she would have met with a
different attorney at a time when perhaps three days of the limitations
period remained.

Defendants' contention must be rejected for two reasons. First, at trial
defendants apparently assumed that the limitations period commenced on
August 29, 1971, and thus did not litigate the instant issue below.
Accordingly, they cannot raise the question for the first time on
appeal. Further, even assuming the limitations period began on October
6, 1971, it is reasonably inferable from the record that Mrs. Togstad
did not see another attorney until after the statute had run. As
discussed above, Mrs. Togstad testified that she consulted a lawyer a
year after she met with Miller. This statement, coupled with the fact
that an action was not brought against Dr. Blake or the hospital but
instead plaintiffs sued defendants for legal malpractice which allegedly
caused Mrs. Togstad to let the limitations period run, allows a jury to
draw a reasonable inference that the statutory period had, in fact,
expired at the time Mrs. Togstad consulted another lawyer. Although this
evidence is weak, it constitutes a prima facie showing, and it was
defendants' responsibility to rebut the inference.

There is also sufficient evidence in the record establishing that, but
for Miller's negligence, plaintiffs would have been successful in
prosecuting their medical malpractice claim. Dr. Woods, in no uncertain
terms, concluded that Mr. Togstad's injuries were caused by the medical
malpractice of Dr. Blake. Defendants' expert testimony to the contrary
was obviously not believed by the jury. Thus, the jury reasonably found
that had plaintiff's medical malpractice action been properly brought,
plaintiffs would have recovered.

Based on the foregoing, we hold that the jury's findings are adequately
supported by the record. Accordingly we uphold the trial court's denial
of defendants' motion for judgment notwithstanding the jury verdict.

Defendants also contend that the trial court erred by refusing to
instruct the jury that plaintiffs' damages should be reduced by the
amount of attorney fees plaintiffs would have paid defendants had Miller
prosecuted the medical malpractice action. In a prior case, this court
was presented with this precise question, but declined to rule on it
because the issue had not been properly raised before the trial court.
The court in that case noted, however:

> The record would indicate that, in the trial of this case, the parties
> probably proceeded upon the assumption that the element of attorneys'
> fees, which plaintiff might have had to pay defendant had he
> successfully prosecuted the suit, was canceled out by the attorneys'
> fees plaintiff incurred in retaining counsel to establish that
> defendant failed to prosecute a recoverable action.

Decisions from other states have divided in their resolution of the
instant question. The cases allowing the deduction of the hypothetical
fees do so without any detailed discussion or reasoning in support
thereof. The courts disapproving of an allowance for attorney fees
reason, consistent with the dicta in Christy, supra, that a reduction
for lawyer fees is unwarranted because of the expense incurred by the
plaintiff in bringing an action against the attorney.

We are persuaded by the reasoning of the cases which do not allow a
reduction for a hypothetical contingency fee, and accordingly reject
defendants' contention.

Affirmed.

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th>CHECK YOUR KNOWLEDGE</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>What was the basis for the Togstads’ claim that Miller’s actions formed an attorney-client relationship? How did Miller respond?</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Why did the court hold that an attorney-client relationship existed between Miller and the Togstads? Do you think it was right?</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>What could Miller have done differently to avoid creating an attorney-client relationship?</td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td>Why did the court hold that Miller was liable for negligence? Do you think it was right?</td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td>How should Miller have responded in order to avoid liability for negligence?</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

**Duties**

**Representation of an Organization**

When an attorney represents an entity, the attorney’s client is the
entity, not the entity’s employees. In other words, when an attorney
represents a corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or
unincorporated association, the attorney’s client is the
**organization**, *not the employees of the organization*.

Or to put it another way, the attorney has an attorney-client
relationship with the organization, but does not necessarily have an
attorney-client relationship with the employees of the organization.
Specifically, the attorney has a duty to represent the organization,
even when its interests diverge from the interests of its employees.

However, an attorney representing an organization must ensure that the
employees of the organization understand that the attorney only
represents the organization, and not its employees. In other words, the
employees must understand that the organization’s attorney is not their
attorney, and that the organization’s attorney has professional duties
only to the organization. This can be difficult to explain, especially
when employees identify their interests with those of the organization.
But attorneys for organizations must clarify their legal relationship to
the employees of those organizations, in order to avoid creating an
attorney-client relationship.

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><a href="https://www.americanbar.org/groups/professional_responsibility/publications/model_rules_of_professional_conduct/rule_1_13_organization_as_client/"><strong><u>Model Rule 1.13: Organization as Client</u></strong></a></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><ol type="a">
<li><blockquote>
<p>A lawyer employed or retained by an organization represents the organization acting through its duly authorized constituents.</p>
</blockquote></li>
<li><blockquote>
<p>If a lawyer for an organization knows that an officer, employee or other person associated with the organization is engaged in action, intends to act or refuses to act in a matter related to the representation that is a violation of a legal obligation to the organization, or a violation of law that reasonably might be imputed to the organization, and that is likely to result in substantial injury to the organization, then the lawyer shall proceed as is reasonably necessary in the best interest of the organization. Unless the lawyer reasonably believes that it is not necessary in the best interest of the organization to do so, the lawyer shall refer the matter to higher authority in the organization, including, if warranted by the circumstances to the highest authority that can act on behalf of the organization as determined by applicable law.</p>
</blockquote></li>
<li><blockquote>
<p>Except as provided in paragraph (d), if</p>
</blockquote>
<ol type="1">
<li><blockquote>
<p>despite the lawyer's efforts in accordance with paragraph (b) the highest authority that can act on behalf of the organization insists upon or fails to address in a timely and appropriate manner an action, or a refusal to act, that is clearly a violation of law, and</p>
</blockquote></li>
<li><blockquote>
<p>the lawyer reasonably believes that the violation is reasonably certain to result in substantial injury to the organization, then the lawyer may reveal information relating to the representation whether or not Rule 1.6 permits such disclosure, but only if and to the extent the lawyer reasonably believes necessary to prevent substantial injury to the organization.</p>
</blockquote></li>
</ol></li>
<li><blockquote>
<p>Paragraph (c) shall not apply with respect to information relating to a lawyer's representation of an organization to investigate an alleged violation of law, or to defend the organization or an officer, employee or other constituent associated with the organization against a claim arising out of an alleged violation of law.</p>
</blockquote></li>
<li><blockquote>
<p>A lawyer who reasonably believes that he or she has been discharged because of the lawyer's actions taken pursuant to paragraphs (b) or (c), or who withdraws under circumstances that require or permit the lawyer to take action under either of those paragraphs, shall proceed as the lawyer reasonably believes necessary to assure that the organization's highest authority is informed of the lawyer's discharge or withdrawal.</p>
</blockquote></li>
<li><blockquote>
<p>In dealing with an organization's directors, officers, employees, members, shareholders or other constituents, a lawyer shall explain the identity of the client when the lawyer knows or reasonably should know that the organization's interests are adverse to those of the constituents with whom the lawyer is dealing.</p>
</blockquote></li>
<li><blockquote>
<p>A lawyer representing an organization may also represent any of its directors, officers, employees, members, shareholders or other constituents, subject to the provisions of Rule 1.7. If the organization's consent to the dual representation is required by Rule 1.7, the consent shall be given by an appropriate official of the organization other than the individual who is to be represented, or by the shareholders.</p>
</blockquote></li>
</ol></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><a href="https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=4427546939148680262"><strong><u><em>Ferranti Intern. PLC v. Clark</em>, 767 F. Supp. 670 (E.D. Pa. 1991)</u></strong></a></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><blockquote>
<p><strong>Summary:</strong> William Clark was general counsel of Ferranti, a corporation, and hired Hogan & Hartson to represent the company in relation to a federal investigation. Hogan & Hartson informed Ferranti’s employees that they should consider retaining an attorney. During the investigation, Clark provided information about his personal legal affairs to Hogan & Hartson. Eventually, Ferranti filed an action against Clark for breach of fiduciary duty and legal malpractice. Clark objected to Hogan & Hartson representing Ferranti. The court dismissed Clark’s objections, because he knew Hogan & Hartson never represented him personally.</p>
</blockquote></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Plaintiff sues for breach of fiduciary duty and professional malpractice
and to rescind a $2.75 million employee "settlement and release"
agreement, which the complaint alleges was obtained by extortion.
Defendant William A. Clark's motion to disqualify the firm of Hogan &
Hartson from representing plaintiff Ferranti International PLC in this
action will be denied for the following reasons:

An attorney-client relationship, express or implied, did not exist
between Hogan & Hartson and William A. Clark when he was Ferranti
International, Inc.'s Vice President and General Counsel.

In July, 1986 defendant Clark, himself an attorney, retained Hogan &
Hartson to represent plaintiff Ferranti International plc and its
subsidiaries in regard to a government investigation of alleged
wrongdoing on the part of their employees. He did so in his capacity as
Ferranti International, Inc.'s, a subsidiary of Ferranti International
plc, Vice President and General Counsel. The need for representation was
triggered by a federal grand jury subpoena served on one of plaintiff's
subsidiaries. Thereafter, the investigation was widened with target
letters and follow-up subpoenas to corporate employees of plaintiff and
plaintiff's other subsidiaries.

Hogan & Hartson did not represent the corporations' employees. Hogan &
Hartson’s attorneys repeatedly stated to the corporations' employees in
defendant's presence that they should obtain separate counsel because of
the potential conflict of interest between employer and employee.
Defendant helped arrange for employees to be separately represented.

Any perception by defendant that he became a client or was a prospective
client of Hogan & Hartson as to his personal legal matters was
unreasonable and without foundation. Defendant's position as general
counsel and corporate officer excluded this law firm from acting as his
personal attorney because of the self-evident interest conflict. Given
the circumstances, the personal matters discussed did not involve an
attorney-client relationship.

The information given Hogan & Hartson by defendant regarding plaintiff,
its subsidiaries and employees was communicated by him in his capacity
as Ferranti International, Inc.'s Vice President and General Counsel.
Proof of defendant's knowledge of such information does not appear to
require that a Hogan & Hartson attorney testify as a witness.

Defendant's status as an attorney has contradictory facets. He selected
Hogan & Hartson to be plaintiff's counsel and subsequently worked with
several of its attorneys in a confidential and apparently close
relationship on behalf of plaintiff, the parent of his then employer.
Having done so and formed such associations, he may understandably
resent and find objectionable the turn of events in which he is now
being sued not only by the same law firm but also on behalf of the
client that he brought to that firm. However, these personal and
business considerations do not necessitate disqualification on
legal-ethical grounds.

This is not a case in which a layperson might have perceived or
reasonably misperceived that his corporate employer's attorney was also
representing him. As a general counsel, defendant must have keenly
appreciated the distinction between the corporation and its employees as
well as the employees' need for separate counsel. Defendant's assertion
that the personal comments and observations exchanged between him and
Hogan & Hartson attorneys were in contemplation of, or resulted in, a
personal attorney-client relationship is factitious and unconvincing.

Although it became a Hogan & Hartson client through defendant, plaintiff
has a cognizable interest in being permitted to continue to be
represented by this firm. Moreover, disqualification—which is an
increasingly frequent issue in the courts— may be the subject of
tactical abuse. A party's choice of counsel should be set aside only
where the circumstances legally require doing so.

Under the Rules of Professional Conduct and the cases, there is no legal
basis on which to disqualify Hogan & Hartson. An evidentiary hearing is
unnecessary.

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
#### Questions 
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><ol type="1">
<li><blockquote>
<p>Why did Clark object to Hogan & Hartson representing Ferranti in its action against him? Why did the court dismiss Clark’s objections?</p>
</blockquote></li>
</ol></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><ol start="2" type="1">
<li><blockquote>
<p>Clark was an attorney and general counsel for Ferranti. Would the court have reached the same conclusion if Clark were not an attorney?</p>
</blockquote></li>
</ol></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><ol start="3" type="1">
<li><blockquote>
<p>Should Ferranti be able to use confidential information provided to Hogan & Hartson by Clark?</p>
</blockquote></li>
</ol></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><ol start="4" type="1">
<li><blockquote>
<p>What should Clark have done differently?</p>
</blockquote></li>
</ol></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

**Prospective Clients**

People and organizations do not always choose to form an attorney-client
relationship immediately. Sometimes, they consider forming an
attorney-client relationship with multiple attorneys or firms before
choosing one.

A “prospective client” is a person or organization that discusses the
possibility of forming an attorney-client relationship with an attorney
or firm. If an attorney or firm learns confidential information from a
prospective client, the attorney or firm may be precluded from
representing other parties in the same matter, if those other parties
interests are adverse to those of the prospective client.

Accordingly, attorneys should try to prevent prospective clients from
disclosing confidential information, in order to avoid disqualification
from representing adverse parties. And attorneys must determine whether
potential clients have disclosed any confidential information, because
it creates a duty of confidentiality.

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><strong>Model Rule 1.18: Client-Lawyer Relationship</strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><ol type="a">
<li><blockquote>
<p>A person who consults with a lawyer about the possibility of forming a client-lawyer relationship with respect to a matter is a prospective client.</p>
</blockquote></li>
<li><blockquote>
<p>Even when no client-lawyer relationship ensues, a lawyer who has learned information from a prospective client shall not use or reveal that information, except as Rule 1.9 would permit with respect to information of a former client.</p>
</blockquote></li>
<li><blockquote>
<p>A lawyer subject to paragraph (b) shall not represent a client with interests materially adverse to those of a prospective client in the same or a substantially related matter if the lawyer received information from the prospective client that could be significantly harmful to that person in the matter, except as provided in paragraph (d). If a lawyer is disqualified from representation under this paragraph, no lawyer in a firm with which that lawyer is associated may knowingly undertake or continue representation in such a matter, except as provided in paragraph (d).</p>
</blockquote></li>
<li><blockquote>
<p>When the lawyer has received disqualifying information as defined in paragraph (c), representation is permissible if:</p>
</blockquote>
<ol type="1">
<li><blockquote>
<p>both the affected client and the prospective client have given informed consent, confirmed in writing, or:</p>
</blockquote></li>
<li><blockquote>
<p>the lawyer who received the information took reasonable measures to avoid exposure to more disqualifying information than was reasonably necessary to determine whether to represent the prospective client; and</p>
</blockquote>
<ol type="i">
<li><blockquote>
<p>the disqualified lawyer is timely screened from any participation in the matter and is apportioned no part of the fee therefrom; and</p>
</blockquote></li>
<li><blockquote>
<p>written notice is promptly given to the prospective client.</p>
</blockquote></li>
</ol></li>
</ol></li>
</ol></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><strong>Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers § 15 (2000)</strong></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><ol type="1">
<li><blockquote>
<p>When a person discusses with a lawyer the possibility of their forming a client-lawyer relationship for a matter and no such relationship ensues, the lawyer must:</p>
</blockquote>
<ol type="a">
<li><blockquote>
<p>not subsequently use or disclose confidential information learned in the consultation, except to the extent permitted with respect to confidential information of a client or former client as stated in §§ 61- 67;</p>
</blockquote></li>
<li><blockquote>
<p>protect the person's property in the lawyer's custody as stated in §§ 44- 46; and</p>
</blockquote></li>
<li><blockquote>
<p>use reasonable care to the extent the lawyer provides the person legal services.</p>
</blockquote></li>
</ol></li>
<li><blockquote>
<p>A lawyer subject to Subsection (1) may not represent a client whose interests are materially adverse to those of a former prospective client in the same or a substantially related matter when the lawyer or another lawyer whose disqualification is imputed to the lawyer under §§ 123 and 124 has received from the prospective client confidential information that could be significantly harmful to the prospective client in the matter, except that such a representation is permissible if:</p>
</blockquote>
<ol type="a">
<li><blockquote>
<p>(i) any personally prohibited lawyer takes reasonable steps to avoid exposure to confidential information other than information appropriate to determine whether to represent the prospective client, and (ii) such lawyer is screened as stated in § 124(2)(b) and (c); or</p>
</blockquote></li>
<li><blockquote>
<p>both the affected client and the prospective client give informed consent to the representation under the limitations and conditions provided in § 122.</p>
</blockquote></li>
</ol></li>
</ol></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><a href="https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=11281821033286907204"><strong><u><em>Clark Capital Management Group, Inc. v. Annuity Investors Life Ins. Co.</em>, 149 F.Supp.2d 193 (E.D. Pa. 2001)</u></strong></a></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><blockquote>
<p><strong>Summary:</strong> Clark filed a trademark infringement action against Annuity. Clark was represented by Woodcock Washburn Kurtz Mackiewicz & Norris LLP and Annuity was represented by Donald E. Frechette of Edwards & Angell LLP. Frechette contacted Thomas S. Biemer of Dilworth Paxson LLP as potential co-counsel. Frechette provided information about the action, and Biemer told Frechette that he would have to run a conflicts check. Frechette never formally retained Biemer. Eventually, Clark retained Stephen L. Friedman of Dilworth, and Annuity objected, because it was a former client of Dilworth in the same matter. The court held that Dilworth could represent Clark, but required Biemer to be screened from the action.</p>
</blockquote></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Defendant Annuity Investors Life Insurance Co. moves for the
disqualification of Stephen L. Friedman and the firm Dilworth Paxson LLP
as co-counsel for plaintiff Clark Capital Management Group. Friedman has
submitted an opposition to this motion. I will deny the motion for
disqualification.

I. Factual Background

On April 14, 2000, Clark Capital filed a complaint against Annuity
alleging trademark infringement. Attorneys with the firm of Woodcock
Washburn Kurtz Mackiewicz & Norris LLP have represented Clark Capital
from day one of this case. In the fall of 2000, Annuity retained Donald
E. Frechette with the firm of Edwards & Angell LLP.

Acting on Annuity's behalf, in the Fall of 2000, Frechette contacted by
telephone Thomas S. Biemer, a partner at Dilworth, to inquire into
Biemer's interest and availability to be retained as co-counsel for
Annuity in the present action. Frechette submitted two sworn affidavits
describing this communication. Frechette asserts in his first sworn
affidavit that he spoke with Biemer by telephone on three occasions. He
states that they first spoke on October 26, 2000 for approximately ten
minutes. Frechette asserts that, during this conversation, he discussed
with Biemer "the background facts of this case, the capabilities of
opposing counsel, Mr. Biemer's firm's experience and familiarity with
opposing counsel and the trial judge, the nature of Annuity's defenses,
the relative merits of each party's case, and potential weaknesses in
plaintiff's case." Frechette further states that he described how the
case had been handled to date.

According to Frechette, he again spoke with Biemer by telephone on
November 6, 2000, for approximately ten to fifteen minutes. He states
that, in this conversation, Frechette provided Biemer with additional
information relating to specific aspects of the case and Annuity's view
of the strengths and weaknesses of these aspects. Frechette also recalls
that they discussed one legal theory that might be employed in Annuity's
defense. Frechette asserts that he spoke with Biemer for a third time on
November 6, 2000, for three to four minutes about a matter of procedure
and timing. Finally, Frechette asserts that he believed that any
confidential information about the case, disclosed to Biemer during
these several conversations, would be kept confidential.

Biemer submitted a sworn affidavit in response to Frechette's affidavit.
Biemer states that he recalls the first two conversations described in
Frechette's affidavit, but not the third conversation. Biemer agrees
that the two attorneys discussed the nature of the case, plaintiff's
counsel, and the court. He asserts, however, that he has no recollection
that any confidential information was disclosed by Frechette. Biemer
recalls only that Frechette informed him that Annuity was claiming the
"usual affirmative defenses," which had already been pled and of public
record. Biemer states in his affidavit that he has no recollection of
any discussion of Annuity's perception of strengths and weaknesses in
the case or of possible defense strategy.

On June 12, 2001, when contacted by the court during a conference in
this case in which Annuity first raised an objection to Friedman's
participation in the case, Biemer stated over the telephone:

> I don't recall, specifically, discussing the merits of the case, other
> than that it involved something that was named Navigator, it was a
> trademark case. I don't remember specifically discussing any
> affirmative defenses, but it's possible we did, I just don't recall,
> it was a while ago.

In addition, Biemer's affidavit states that he told Frechette during the
first conversation that, before Dilworth could agree to represent
Annuity, he would have to run a conflict check. Biemer avers that it was
not until the second conversation that Frechette asked Biemer to run a
conflict check, "if Dilworth was interested in serving as local
counsel." Biemer also states that Frechette asked him to send Frechette
any relevant information materials about Dilworth. Following the
November 6, 2000 telephone conversation, Biemer had no further
communications with Frechette about this case, and an offer of retention
was never made.

Frechette's second affidavit was submitted in response to Biemer's
affidavit. In this affidavit, Frechette asserts that the issue of a
conflict search was not discussed during the telephone conversations. He
states that Biemer mentioned a conflict check for the first time in a
letter dated November 7, 2000. Frechette further states:

> I certainly assumed that Attorney Biemer would not undertake a matter
> without performing a conflict check and, accordingly, felt no need to
> specifically inquire as to the matter further.

Annuity never retained Dilworth. On June 11, 2001, Friedman, a Dilworth
attorney, entered an appearance on behalf of Clark Capital.

II\. Discussion

Annuity asserts that these several telephone conversations between
Frechette and Biemer rose to the level of an attorney-client
relationship between Annuity and Biemer, such that Friedman is in
violation of the Rules of Professional Conduct. This District has
adopted the Pennsylvania Rules of Professional Conduct. These Rules
provide that:

> A lawyer who has formerly represented a client in a matter shall not
> thereafter:
>
> \(a\) Represent another person in the same or substantially related
> matter in which that person's interests are materially adverse to the
> interests of the former client unless the former client consents after
> a full disclosure of the circumstances and consultation.

Rule of Professional Conduct 1.9.

This prohibition disqualifies the lawyer's entire firm.

While lawyers are associated in a firm, none of them shall knowingly
represent a client when any one of them practicing alone would be
prohibited from doing so. Annuity argues that, because Frechette's
telephone conversations with Biemer rose to the level of an
attorney-client relationship, Annuity is a "former client" of Dilworth
and, therefore, Friedman may not now represent the opposing party in
this same matter.

To determine whether Friedman is in violation of these ethical rules, I
must decide whether Annuity is a "former client" of Dilworth. In other
words, did there previously exist an attorney-client relationship
between Annuity and Dilworth. "An attorney-client relationship is one of
agency and arises only when the parties have given their consent, either
express or implied, to its formation." Both parties agree that no formal
attorney-client relationship existed between Annuity and Dilworth.
"Where no express relationship exists, the intent to create an
attorney-client relationship can be implied from the conduct of the
parties." The issue is whether an implied attorney-client relationship
arose during the course of the several telephone conversations between
Frechette and Biemer. Annuity asserts that an implied attorney-client
relationship between Annuity and Biemer arose because, acting on
Annuity's behalf, Frechette: (1) disclosed confidential information to
Biemer, (2) with a reasonable belief that Biemer was acting in the
capacity of attorney for Annuity throughout the course of the
communication.

Based on the facts presented, I find that the several brief telephone
conversations between Frechette and Biemer did not give rise to an
implied attorney-client relationship between Annuity and Dilworth.
Frechette asserts in his first sworn affidavit that he disclosed to
Biemer confidential information related to Annuity's defenses and legal
theories of the case. Biemer admits that it is possible such disclosures
were made. However, Biemer contends that he has no recollection of
disclosure of any confidential information.

Setting aside for the moment the question of whether confidential
information was in fact disclosed, it is clear from the facts presented
that Frechette could not have held a reasonable belief that Biemer was
acting as an attorney for Annuity during the course of the
communication. Frechette initiated the communication with Biemer to
inquire into Biemer's interest and availability to be retained as
co-counsel for Annuity in the present action. At no time during the
communication did Frechette offer to retain Biemer as co-counsel and at
no time during the communication did Biemer consent to representation of
Annuity. To the contrary, it was evident from Frechette's request that
Biemer send informational materials about the firm, that Frechette had
not yet decided whether to retain Biemer as co-counsel. Frechette was
reserving the right to make a decision after learning more about the
firm.

Furthermore, it is evident that Frechette never conceived that Biemer
was acting as Annuity's attorney during the communication, because
Biemer had not yet run a conflict check. Frechette contests Biemer's
assertion that Biemer raised the need to run a conflict check before
consenting to representation during the telephone conversations.
However, even if Biemer did not raise the need to run a conflict check,
Frechette, equally knowledgeable of the ethical rules, was well aware
that Biemer would not consent to representation of Annuity before
running a conflict check. Frechette explicitly stated in his second
sworn affidavit:

> I certainly assumed that Attorney Biemer would not undertake a matter
> without performing a conflict check and, accordingly, felt no need to
> specifically inquire as to the matter further.

When Frechette first contacted Biemer on October 26, 2000, the telephone
conversation during which Frechette asserts that he first disclosed
confidential information to Biemer, Frechette could not have reasonably
assumed that Biemer had already run a conflict check. By Frechette's own
admission, therefore, it was unreasonable for Frechette to assume during
that conversation that Biemer had consented to representation of
Annuity. The duty to maintain confidences does not arise absent an
attorney-client relationship. It follows that Frechette unreasonably
assumed that Biemer would maintain the confidentiality of any
information Frechette disclosed, despite Frechette's awareness that no
attorney-client relationship had been established. Annuity is not a
former client of Biemer and neither Friedman nor Dilworth are in
violation of Pennsylvania Rule of Professional Conduct 1.9.

I must still address the concern that confidential information about the
case may have been disclosed by Frechette, which potentially could be
used to the detriment of Annuity if Friedman is permitted to serve as
counsel to Clark Capital. “One of the inherent powers of the federal
court is the admission and discipline of attorneys practicing before
it.” Therefore, when there is a risk that the underlying litigation may
be tainted by participation of counsel, the court has the power to
fashion an appropriate remedy.

In the event that confidential information was disclosed, I find that
disqualification of Dilworth is an inappropriate remedy under the facts
of this case, but rather that screening Biemer from the case will
appropriately balance the interests of all parties. Biemer asserts that
he has no recollection that any confidential information was disclosed
to him about this case. Therefore, even if he did receive confidential
information about the case, Biemer is not capable of relaying anything
of substance to other Dilworth attorneys. Biemer also asserts in his
affidavit that he has been screened from the matter from the moment
Clark Capital contacted the firm. He states:

> On approximately June 7, 2001, I learned that Dilworth was contacted
> by Clark Capital and asked to enter its appearance as counsel for
> Clark Capital. When I learned this, I relayed to one of the heads of
> Dilworth's litigation department, James Rogers, Esquire, the substance
> of my conversations with Mr. Frechette as outlined in this Affidavit.
> While we agreed that there was no conflict given the limited nature of
> these conversations, in an abundance of caution, it was decided that I
> would not be involved in any respect with this case and would not have
> any contact regarding the substance of the case with anyone working on
> the case for Dilworth. With the exception of my participation in the
> Conference Call before the Court on June 11, 2001 and the preparation
> of this Affidavit, I have not had any involvement in this case.
> Friedman substantiated Biemer's assertion on the record at the June
> 12, 2001 conference in this matter, stating that Biemer will have
> nothing to do with this case and that Friedman has had no
> conversations with Biemer about the case other than to inform Friedman
> of the brief communication between Biemer and Frechette.

I am not persuaded by Annuity's argument that disqualification of
Dilworth is necessary to protect against the “mere appearance of an
impropriety” and to maintain the integrity of the legal profession.
While the ethical rules are designed, in part, to encourage
attorney-client candor, attorneys that have already been retained in a
matter and who are well versed in the perimeters of the attorney-client
relationship, should be encouraged to take care with their client's
confidences in the course of preliminary inquiries with potential
co-counsel in another firm. Such inquiries should not form the basis for
disqualification of an entire firm in situations, such as this, where it
was clear to both parties that an attorney-client relationship was never
established. Allowing Friedman to be retained by Clark Capital in this
matter requires effective screening of only a single attorney out of
approximately 100 attorneys at Dilworth. In light of this, the fact that
Annuity is not a former client of Dilworth, and the minimal likelihood
that Dilworth's involvement in this case would taint the pending
litigation, I will deny Annuity's motion to disqualify Friedman and
Dilworth. I will require that Dilworth continue to screen Biemer from
any involvement in this case.

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
#### Questions 
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><ol type="1">
<li><blockquote>
<p>What was the basis for Annuity’s objection to Dilworth’s representation of Clark?</p>
</blockquote></li>
</ol></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><ol start="2" type="1">
<li><blockquote>
<p>If Frechette provided confidential information to Biemer, is screening him from the action a sufficient remedy?</p>
</blockquote></li>
</ol></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><ol start="3" type="1">
<li><blockquote>
<p>Why shouldn’t the court disqualify Dilworth from representing Clark in this action?</p>
</blockquote></li>
</ol></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

**Further Reading:**

- 

[1] The Magnetic Fields, *With Whom to Dance?*, Get Lost (1995).
