**5.8: Associational Conflicts of Interest**

When attorneys are associated with each other in a partnership, firm, or
similar organization, a conflict of interest affecting one of the
associated attorneys may be imputed to the other attorneys who are
members of the association. For example, associated attorneys typically
may not represent clients with adverse interests, just like individual
attorneys may not represent clients with adverse interests. Associated
attorneys may not represent new clients whose interests are adverse to
the interests of a client of an associated attorney. And if the clients
of an associated attorney develop adverse interests, the attorneys may
be required to withdraw from representation.

Of course, conflicts of interest do not necessarily preclude
representation. The clients of associated attorneys may provide informed
consent to representation despite the conflict, just like the clients of
individual attorneys.

Often, the clients of associated attorneys have conflicts of interest
relating to the duty of confidentiality. If the conflict in question can
be resolved by informed consent, associated attorneys often can avoid
violating the duty of confidentiality by adopting screening procedures
that prevent attorneys representing one client from accessing
confidential information provided by the other client.

[**<u>Rule 1.10: Imputation of Conflicts of Interest: General
Rule</u>**](https://www.americanbar.org/groups/professional_responsibility/publications/model_rules_of_professional_conduct/rule_1_10_imputation_of_conflicts_of_interest_general_rule/)

1.  While lawyers are associated in a firm, none of them shall knowingly
    > represent a client when any one of them practicing alone would be
    > prohibited from doing so by Rules 1.7 or 1.9, unless

    1.  the prohibition is based on a personal interest of the
    disqualified lawyer and does not present a significant risk of
    materially limiting the representation of the client by the
    remaining lawyers in the firm; or

    2.  the prohibition is based upon Rule 1.9(a) or (b) and arises out
    of the disqualified lawyer’s association with a prior firm,
    and

        1.  the disqualified lawyer is timely screened from any
        participation in the matter and is apportioned no part of
        the fee therefrom;

        2.  written notice is promptly given to any affected former
        client to enable the former client to ascertain compliance
        with the provisions of this Rule, which shall include a
        description of the screening procedures employed; a
        statement of the firm's and of the screened lawyer's
        compliance with these Rules; a statement that review may
        be available before a tribunal; and an agreement by the
        firm to respond promptly to any written inquiries or
        objections by the former client about the screening
        procedures; and

        3.  certifications of compliance with these Rules and with the
        screening procedures are provided to the former client by
        the screened lawyer and by a partner of the firm, at
        reasonable intervals upon the former client's written
        request and upon termination of the screening procedures.

2.  When a lawyer has terminated an association with a firm, the firm is
    > not prohibited from thereafter representing a person with
    > interests materially adverse to those of a client represented by
    > the formerly associated lawyer and not currently represented by
    > the firm, unless:

    1.  the matter is the same or substantially related to that in which
    the formerly associated lawyer represented the client; and

    2.  any lawyer remaining in the firm has information protected by
    Rules 1.6 and 1.9(c) that is material to the matter.

3.  A disqualification prescribed by this rule may be waived by the
    > affected client under the conditions stated in Rule 1.7.

4.  The disqualification of lawyers associated in a firm with former or
    > current government lawyers is governed by Rule 1.11.

[**<u>Rule 1.10 Imputation of Conflicts of Interest: General Rule,
Comment
\[1\]</u>**](https://www.americanbar.org/groups/professional_responsibility/publications/model_rules_of_professional_conduct/rule_1_10_imputation_of_conflicts_of_interest_general_rule/comment_on_rule_1_10/)

For purposes of the Rules of Professional Conduct, the term “firm”
denotes lawyers in a law partnership, professional corporation, sole
proprietorship or other association authorized to practice law; or
lawyers employed in a legal services organization or the legal
department of a corporation or other organization.

[**<u>Rule 1.10 Imputation of Conflicts of Interest: General Rule,
Comment
\[2\]</u>**](https://www.americanbar.org/groups/professional_responsibility/publications/model_rules_of_professional_conduct/rule_1_10_imputation_of_conflicts_of_interest_general_rule/comment_on_rule_1_10/)

The rule of imputed disqualification stated in paragraph (a) gives
effect to the principle of loyalty to the client as it applies to
lawyers who practice in a law firm. Such situations can be considered
from the premise that a firm of lawyers is essentially one lawyer for
purposes of the rules governing loyalty to the client, or from the
premise that each lawyer is vicariously bound by the obligation of
loyalty owed by each lawyer with whom the lawyer is associated.
Paragraph (a)(1) operates only among the lawyers currently associated in
a firm.

**Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers § 123 (2000):
Imputation of a Conflict of Interest to an Affiliated Lawyer**

Unless all affected clients consent to the representation under the
limitations and conditions provided in § 122 or unless imputation
hereunder is removed as provided in § 124, the restrictions upon a
lawyer imposed by §§ 125- 135 also restrict other affiliated lawyers
who:

1.  are associated with that lawyer in rendering legal services to
    > others through a law partnership, professional corporation, sole
    > proprietorship, or similar association;

2.  are employed with that lawyer by an organization to render legal
    > services either to that organization or to others to advance the
    > interests or objectives of the organization; or

3.  share office facilities without reasonably adequate measures to
    > protect confidential client information so that it will not be
    > available to other lawyers in the shared office.

**Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers § 124 (2000):
Removing Imputation**

1.  Imputation specified in § 123 does not restrict an affiliated lawyer
    > when the affiliation between the affiliated lawyer and the
    > personally prohibited lawyer that required the imputation has been
    > terminated, and no material confidential information of the
    > client, relevant to the matter, has been communicated by the
    > personally prohibited lawyer to the affiliated lawyer or that
    > lawyer's firm.

2.  Imputation specified in § 123 does not restrict an affiliated lawyer
    > with respect to a former-client conflict under § 132, when there
    > is no substantial risk that confidential information of the former
    > client will be used with material adverse effect on the former
    > client because:

    1.  any confidential client information communicated to the
    personally prohibited lawyer is unlikely to be significant in
    the subsequent matter;

    2.  the personally prohibited lawyer is subject to screening
    measures adequate to eliminate participation by that lawyer in
    the representation; and

    3.  timely and adequate notice of the screening has been provided to
    all affected clients.

3.  Imputation specified in § 123 does not restrict a lawyer affiliated
    > with a former government lawyer with respect to a conflict under §
    > 133 if:

    1.  the personally prohibited lawyer is subject to screening
    measures adequate to eliminate involvement by that lawyer in
    the representation; and

    2.  timely and adequate notice of the screening has been provided to
    the appropriate government agency and to affected clients.

<img src="/assets/images/image3.png" style="width:5.72917in;height:4.47917in" />

[**<u>*Cinema 5, Ltd. v. Cinerama, Inc.*, 528 F. 2d 1384 (2d Cir.
1976)</u>**](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=12185981601498967401)

> **Summary:** Attorney Manly Fleischmann was a partner in Jaeckle,
> Fleischmann and Mugel of Buffalo and in Webster, Sheffield,
> Fleischmann, Hitchcock and Brookfield of New York City. Cinerama
> distributed movies and operated movie theaters. Cinerama hired
> Fleischmann and Jaeckle to defend it in an antitrust action in upstate
> New York. Then, Cinema 5 hired Webster to represent it in a similar
> antitrust action in New York City. Cinerama filed a motion to
> disqualify Webster because Fleischmann was a partner. Fleischmann
> responded that the actions were not substantially related. The
> district court granted the motion, and the circuit court affirmed.

Before MOORE, FEINBERG and VAN GRAAFEILAND, Circuit Judges.

VAN GRAAFEILAND, Circuit Judge:

This appeal from an order granting defendants’ motion to disqualify
plaintiff's counsel presents a somewhat unusual set of facts. Counsel
has been disqualified from further representation of plaintiff because a
partner in this New York City law firm is also a partner in a Buffalo
firm which is presently representing the defendant Cinerama, Inc. in
other litigation of a somewhat similar nature. Although we agree with
the district court that there was no actual wrongdoing and intend no
criticism of the lawyers involved, we find no abuse of the district
court’s discretion, and so affirm.

There is little or no dispute as to the facts, most of them having been
stipulated. Attorney Manly Fleischmann is a partner in Jaeckle,
Fleischmann and Mugel of Buffalo and in Webster, Sheffield, Fleischmann,
Hitchcock and Brookfield of New York City. He divides his time between
the two offices. Cinerama is a distributor of motion pictures and the
operator of several large theater chains. In January 1972 the Jaeckle
firm was retained to represent Cinerama and several other defendants in
an action brought in the United States District Court for the Western
District of New York. Plaintiffs in that suit are local upstate theater
operators who allege antitrust violations resulting from discriminatory
and monopolistic licensing and distribution of motion pictures in the
Rochester area. A similar action involving allegedly illegal
distribution in the Buffalo area was commenced in March 1974, and the
Jaeckle office represents the interests of Cinerama in this action also.
Both suits are presently pending in the Western District.

The instant action, brought in the Southern District of New York in
August 1974, alleges a conspiracy among the defendants to acquire
control of plaintiff corporation through stock acquisitions, with the
intention of creating a monopoly and restraining competition in New York
City's first-run motion picture theater market. Judge Brieant found that
there was sufficient relationship between the two law firms and the two
controversies to inhibit future confidential communications between
Cinerama and its attorneys and that disqualification was required to
avoid even the appearance of professional impropriety.

Appellant’s counsel strongly dispute these findings. They say that they
should not be disqualified unless the relationship between the
controversies is substantial, and they contend there is nothing
substantial in the relationship between an upstate New York conspiracy
to deprive local theater operators of access to films and an attempted
corporate take-over in New York City.

The “substantial relationship” test is indeed the one that we have
customarily applied in determining whether a lawyer may accept
employment against a former client. However, in this case, suit is not
against a former client, but an existing one. One firm in which attorney
Fleischmann is a partner is suing an actively represented client of
another firm in which attorney Fleischmann is a partner. The propriety
of this conduct must be measured not so much against the similarities in
litigation, as against the duty of undivided loyalty which an attorney
owes to each of his clients.

A lawyer’s duty to his client is that of a fiduciary or trustee. When
Cinerama retained Mr. Fleischmann as its attorney in the Western
District litigation, it was entitled to feel that at least until that
litigation was at an end, it had his undivided loyalty as its advocate
and champion, and could rely upon his “undivided allegiance and
faithful, devoted service.” Because “no man can serve two masters,”
Matthew 6:24, it had the right to expect also that he would “accept no
retainer to do anything that might be adverse to his client's
interests.” Needless to say, when Mr. Fleischmann and his New York City
partners undertook to represent Cinema 5, Ltd., they owed it the same
fiduciary duty of undivided loyalty and allegiance.

Ethical Considerations 5-1 and 5-14 of the American Bar Association's
Code of Professional Responsibility provide that the professional
judgment of a lawyer must be exercised solely for the benefit of his
client, free of compromising influences and loyalties, and this
precludes his acceptance of employment that will adversely affect his
judgment or dilute his loyalty. The Code has been adopted by the New
York State Bar Association, and its canons are recognized by both
Federal and State Courts as appropriate guidelines for the professional
conduct of New York lawyers.

Under the Code, the lawyer who would sue his own client, asserting in
justification the lack of “substantial relationship” between the
litigation and the work he has undertaken to perform for that client, is
leaning on a slender reed indeed. Putting it as mildly as we can, we
think it would be questionable conduct for an attorney to participate in
any lawsuit against his own client without the knowledge and consent of
all concerned. This appears to be the opinion of the foremost writers in
the field, and it is the holding of the New York courts. In *Matter of
Kelly*, New York's highest court said that “with rare and conditional
exceptions, the lawyer may not place himself in a position where a
conflicting interest may, even inadvertently, affect, or give the
appearance of affecting, the obligations of the professional
relationship.” Nor is New York alone in this view. In *Grievance
Committee v. Rottner*, Connecticut’s highest court held that the
maintenance of public confidence in the bar requires an attorney to
decline employment adverse to his client, even though the nature of such
employment is wholly unrelated to that of his existing representation.

Whether such adverse representation, without more, requires
disqualification in every case, is a matter we need not now decide. We
do hold, however, that the “substantial relationship” test does not set
a sufficiently high standard by which the necessity for disqualification
should be determined. That test may properly be applied only where the
representation of a former client has been terminated and the parameters
of such relationship have been fixed. Where the relationship is a
continuing one, adverse representation is prima facie improper, and the
attorney must be prepared to show, at the very least, that there will be
no actual or apparent conflict in loyalties or diminution in the vigor
of his representation. We think that appellants have failed to meet this
heavy burden and that, so long as Mr. Fleischmann and his Buffalo
partners continue to represent Cinerama, he and his New York City
partners should not represent Cinema 5, Ltd. in this litigation.

Because he is a partner in the Jaeckle firm, Mr. Fleischmann owes the
duty of undivided loyalty to that firm's client, Cinerama. Because he is
a partner in the Webster firm, he owes the same duty to Cinema 5, Ltd.
It can hardly be disputed that there is at least the appearance of
impropriety where half his time is spent with partners who are defending
Cinerama in multi-million dollar litigation, while the other half is
spent with partners who are suing Cinerama in a lawsuit of equal
substance.[1]

Because “an attorney must avoid not only the fact, but even the
appearance, of representing conflicting interests,” this requires his
disqualification. Moreover, because of the peculiarly close relationship
existing among legal partners, if Mr. Fleischmann is disqualified, his
partners at the Webster firm are disqualified as well.

Nothing that we have heretofore said is intended as criticism of the
character and professional integrity of Mr. Fleischmann and his
partners. We are convinced that the dual representation came about
inadvertently and unknowingly, and we are in complete accord with Judge
Brieant’s finding that there has been no actual wrongdoing. Furthermore,
the record shows that after learning of the conflict which had
developed, the Jaeckle firm, through Mr. Fleischmann, offered to
withdraw its representation of Cinerama in the Western District actions.
However, that offer was not accepted, and Mr. Fleischmann continued,
albeit reluctantly, to have one foot in each camp.

Under the circumstances, Judge Brieant’s order of disqualification
cannot be construed as an abuse of his discretion. We therefore affirm.

**Questions:**

1.  Why did the court grant Cinerama’s motion to disqualify Fleischmann?
    > Did it identify a conflict of interest? Was Fleischmann working on
    > the action against Cinerama?

2.  Why did Cinerama file a motion to disqualify Webster? Should Cinema
    > 5’s preferences matter under the circumstances?

3.  What if Webster screened Fleischmann from the Cinema 5 litigation?
    > What if Fleishmann left Jaeckle?

<img src="/assets/images/image2.png" style="width:3.25905in;height:3.25905in" />

[**<u>*Borden v. Borden*, 277 A. 2d 89 (D.C. App.
1971)</u>**](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=11851927748596594921)

> **Summary:** Helen Borden filed a complaint to divorce her husband,
> George Borden. Helen was represented by an attorney from the
> Neighborhood Legal Services Program (NLSP). Helen’s attorney moved for
> assignment of counsel to represent George. The trial court ordered
> attorney David S. Raycroft, who works for NLSP, to represent George.
> Both attorneys from NLSP filed a motion to set aside the trial court’s
> order since both attorneys were employed by NLSP and the order created
> a conflict of interest under the Code of Professional Responsibility.
> The trial court denied the motion because no economic conflict
> existed. The appellate court reversed, because the NLSP functions as a
> firm and there is an inherent conflict of interest that public policy
> concerns do not override.

KERN, Associate Judge:

The issue presented by this appeal is whether it was error for the trial
judge sitting in the Domestic Relations Branch of the District of
Columbia Court of General Sessions to refuse to vacate his order
assigning an attorney employed by the Neighborhood Legal Services
Program (NLSP) to represent the defendant in this action, when the
plaintiff was already represented by an NLSP lawyer.

On September 22, 1969, appellant Helen Borden filed a complaint seeking
a divorce from appellee George Borden on the ground of adultery. On
April 2, 1970, appellant, represented by an attorney from NLSP and
proceeding in forma pauperis, moved for assignment of counsel to
represent appellee. The trial court ordered David S. Raycroft, an
attorney employed by the NLSP, to enter an appearance on behalf of and
represent appellee. On June 8, 1970, appellant's attorney, joined by
appellee's attorney, filed a motion to set aside the trial court's order
of appointment of counsel on the ground that since both attorneys in the
case were employed by the NLSP the order created a conflict of interest
under the Code of Professional Responsibility, and the divorce
ultimately obtained could be invalid due to alleged collusion.

On June 9, 1970, the trial judge denied the motion to set aside his
appointment of counsel, relying specifically on his order in another
case, *McGee v. McGee*, which stated, inter alia:

> Since, therefore, no economic conflict exists, no corporate interests
> is in any way involved and no legal partnership as such has been
> disclosed it would appear that in fact and objectively speaking there
> is no conflict of interest.

Mrs. Borden appeals from this order of denial.

While the trial court’s refusal to set aside his order of appointment is
not final in the sense of disposing of the case on its merits, it does
have “a final and irreparable effect upon the rights of the parties” and
is therefore appealable. The effect of the trial court's order is to
force the parties to go to trial represented by attorneys who practice
law within the same organization, which appears on its face to
constitute a conflict of interest, and who have stated upon the record
their inability to represent the cause of their clients and remain
faithful to the Code of Professional Responsibility. In addition, the
parties have ground for concern that the final decree in the case on the
merits could be subject to the subsequent charge of collusion and its
validity thus put in question. We think that the administration of
justice would best be served by recognizing the cloud which the order of
appointment of counsel has put upon the present proceedings and by
treating the order as final for the purpose of review.

Turning to the merits of the assignment of counsel order, it is
axiomatic that members of the same law firm may not represent adverse
parties. Corporation Counsel concedes this but takes the position that:

> NLSP cannot be analogized to the typical law firm for purposes of
> application of the conflict-of-interest concept NLSP’s activities more
> logically fall within the group legal services concept.

It argues that under *N.A.A.C.P. v. Button*, the constitutional right
being asserted must be balanced on the scale of public interest against
the alleged professional impropriety. When this is done, in the instant
case, so the argument goes, the right and need of the poor to have legal
representation in domestic relations matters is paramount to the
allegedly remote possibility of a conflict of interest growing out of
the representation of both parties by NLSP attorneys. It is pointed out
that since NLSP attorneys receive no compensation from their clients
there can be no economic conflict of interest, as would be the case if
they were practicing in the same law firm.

We are not persuaded that the possibility of conflict of interest which
appellee’s attorney proffered as his reason for wishing to withdraw from
participation in this case is remote. While the NLSP is not a law firm
it is a group of attorneys practicing law together in an organizational
structure much like a law firm. It has a Board of Directors and an
Executive Director who are analogous to a firm’s managing partners. It
has one attorney in each of its branch offices whose responsibility is
to supervise the junior attorneys, much like a firm's senior partner
working with his associates. All NLSP attorneys participate in office
meetings and receive intra-office communications on substantive law,
litigation techniques and tactics and office policy. Lawyers who
practice their profession side-by-side, literally and figuratively, are
subject to subtle influences that may well affect their professional
judgment and loyalty to their clients, even though they are not faced
with the more easily recognized economic conflict of interest. In
addition, the appointment of attorneys who work together presents an
impression scarcely consistent with the bar’s efforts to maintain public
confidence in the law and lawyers.

Also we fail to find in this case the extraordinary circumstances
present in *N.A.A.C.P. v. Button*, where legal representation to
vindicate constitutional rights of a group of citizens was simply
unavailable except in the form of group legal services which the State
contended amounted to barratry, maintenance and champerty. With all
deference to the trial court’s efforts to date to assure full
representation of all who seek access to the Domestic Relations Court we
are not persuaded that the supply of attorneys available in the District
of Columbia has been exhausted so that NLSP attorneys must now represent
both sides of a divorce action.

Finally, we are reluctant to approve any action in the matter of
professional ethics which distinguishes between attorneys who are in
private practice and attorneys who are not. In the first place, Congress
has expressly recognized that “anti-poverty lawyers” are to be governed
by the traditional standards of the profession. The ABA has held that
legal aid attorneys have a “primary obligation of loyalty” to their
clients and are required “to act in accordance with the Code of
Professional Responsibility.” Other jurisdictions have specifically
barred anti-poverty lawyers from representing adverse parties in
domestic relations litigation because such representation falls afoul of
the Canons. We are reluctant ever to make an exception from the
professional norm for attorneys employed by the government or others who
provide legal representation without compensation from the client
because then we might encourage a misapprehension that the special
nature of such representation justifies departure from the profession's
standards. We should avoid always any action that would give the
appearance that government attorneys are “legal Hessians” hired “to do a
job” rather than attorneys at law. On the other hand, we should expect
always from these attorneys uncompromising adherence to the profession's
established standards.

We conclude that it was error for the trial court to refuse to vacate
its assignment of an NLSP attorney to represent appellee in the trial of
appellant's divorce action which was being presented by another NLSP
attorney and that this case must be remanded for appointment of new
counsel for appellee.

**Questions:**

1.  What was the conflict of interest?

2.  Why did NLSP’s corporate counsel argue against the motion?

3.  What public policy concerns did the court say were not sufficient to
    > override the inherent conflict of interest?

4.  Did the court’s ruling harm or benefit NLSP’s mission to provide
    > legal services to the poor?

<img src="/assets/images/image1.png" style="width:4.56771in;height:1.76042in" /><img src="/assets/images/image4.png" style="width:1.73438in;height:2.00913in" />

# [**<u>*People ex rel. Dept. of Corporations v. SpeeDee Oil Change Systems, Inc.*, 20 Cal. 4th 1135 (Cal. 1999)</u>**](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=4067765311132328506)

> **Summary:** Attorney Eliot G. Disner was “of counsel” to Shapiro,
> Rosenfeld & Close. Attorney Geordan Goebel represented SpeeDee Oil
> Change Systems. Goebel consulted with Shapiro about an antitrust
> action SpeeDee had filed against Mobil Oil, and then associated
> Shapiro with the action as counsel. Cohon and Gardner represented
> Mobil in the SpeeDee action. Cohon consulted with Disner about the
> SpeeDee action, and planned to retain him as a consultant. But when
> Cohon and Gardner learned that Shapiro was representing SpeeDee, they
> filed a motion to disqualify the firm, because of its association with
> Disner. The trial court denied the motion, and the intermediate
> appellate court affirmed, because Disner did not provide any
> confidential information to Shapiro. The California Supreme Court
> reversed, because Disner represented adversaries in the same
> litigation.

CHIN, J.

When a conflict of interest requires an attorney’s disqualification from
a matter, the disqualification normally extends vicariously to the
attorney’s entire law firm. This rule safeguards clients’ legitimate
expectations that their attorneys will protect client confidences. Here,
we decide whether the same rule should apply when a party unknowingly
consults an attorney “of counsel” to the law firm representing the
party's adversary in the subject of the consultation.

Mobil Oil Corporation consulted Attorney Eliot G. Disner, who was of
counsel to Shapiro, Rosenfeld & Close. Mobil was a defendant in a
complaint in intervention by respondents Gary and Annette Burch et al.,
Southern California franchisees of SpeeDee Oil Change Systems, Inc.
While Mobil was consulting Disner, respondents associated the Shapiro
firm as counsel of record in their action against Mobil. Mobil moved to
disqualify the Shapiro firm upon learning of its association, arguing
that Disner had a conflict of interest that required its vicarious
disqualification.

The trial court denied Mobil's motion. The court found no basis for a
presumption that Disner disclosed confidences to the Shapiro firm,
notwithstanding Disner's relationship with the firm. The Court of Appeal
affirmed, concluding that substantial evidence existed for implied
findings that Disner’s relationship with the Shapiro firm was not
“close, personal, continuous, and regular” and that Disner conveyed no
confidential information to the firm. We granted Mobil's petition for
review.

We adopt the prevailing rule concerning “of counsel” conflicts of
interest and reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeal. For attorneys
in the same firm to represent adverse parties in the same litigation is
so patently improper that the rule of disqualification is a per se or
“automatic” one. Conflicting representations that would disqualify all
of a law firm’s attorneys are not more acceptable when an attorney of
counsel to the firm creates the conflict. Clients, and the public,
should expect confidentiality and loyalty from attorneys who effectively
declare they practice law in a close, personal, and continuing
association. These legitimate expectations would be frustrated if a firm
could represent one party in litigation while an attorney of counsel to
the firm represented an adversary in the same case.

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

Attorney Geordan Goebel, a sole practitioner, had represented
respondents since 1994. Because of the action’s scope, he decided to
associate a law firm as attorneys of record to help him prosecute
respondents’ claims. Goebel approached the Shapiro firm because of its
expertise in franchise law and met with Mitchell Shapiro on June 22,
1996. Around this time, the Shapiro firm's letterhead listed 14
attorneys’ names, with 4 more attorneys listed as of counsel to the
firm, all at the same office address. Among those identified as of
counsel to the firm was Eliot G. Disner, an attorney who had substantial
experience with antitrust issues.

Over the next few weeks, Goebel developed a “good working relationship”
with the Shapiro firm. On July 10, he signed a notice associating the
Shapiro firm as counsel of record for respondents. Mitchell Shapiro
signed the notice for the Shapiro firm on July 12. The notice of
association of counsel was served by mail on July 15, 1996, and filed
with the court the following day.

The law firm of Cohon and Gardner represented Mobil in the SpeeDee Oil
action. Early in July 1996, Jeffrey Cohon, an associate with Cohon and
Gardner, spoke to Attorney Steven Hecht about contacting Disner
concerning the case. Hecht knew both Cohon and Disner personally. To
facilitate an initial check for conflicts, Cohon told Hecht the name of
the case and the principal attorneys involved. Hecht spoke with Disner
later that week. Hecht asked Disner if he knew of the case involving
SpeeDee Oil and Mobil. When Disner said he did not, Hecht asked him to
call Jeffrey Cohon.

Disner and Cohon spoke by telephone on July 11 or 12. When Cohon
returned Disner's call, the receptionist answered the telephone,
“Shapiro, Rosenfeld and Close.” Cohon's call was put through to Disner,
who confirmed he had spoken with Hecht and had not heard of the SpeeDee
Oil case or the attorneys involved in it. In a conversation Cohon
believed was confidential, he and Disner discussed the case’s
substantive allegations, its procedural status, and Mobil's theories.
They arranged a meeting for July 16.

On July 16, 1996, Cohon and Gardner Attorneys Bennett Cohon, Jeffrey
Cohon, and Steven Gardner met with Disner to discuss his assisting with
Mobil's representation. They spoke for one to two hours over lunch.
Gardner received a copy of Disner's resume, which—like Disner's business
card—prominently featured the Shapiro firm's name and address.

Gardner briefed Disner on the case and Mobil's position. The matters
disclosed to Disner included "the background of the case, Mobil's
theories in the case, Mobil's discovery strategy and an analysis of the
procedural and substantive issues which had arisen to date and \[were\]
likely to arise in the future, the state of the case, experts, and
consultants, and specific factual issues." The Cohon and Gardner
attorneys considered the information disclosed to Disner to be
confidential and attorney work product.

According to Gardner's and Jeffrey Cohon's declarations, when the
meeting ended, Gardner and Disner agreed to prepare a document formally
retaining Disner as a consultant. Disner did not directly contradict the
Cohon and Gardner attorneys' statements. His declaration stated that at
the end of the meeting, the Cohon and Gardner attorneys "expressed
interest" in using his services, although they did not know "exactly"
how they intended to do so.

Gardner further declared that Disner agreed to check some statutes and
case law that applied to a few of the issues they discussed. He stated
that he and Disner spoke again later in the afternoon of July 16, and
Disner conveyed the results of his review of those issues. No
declaration contradicted Gardner's account of those discussions.

The next day, July 17, Gardner received the notice of the Shapiro firm's
association as counsel for respondents. Consequently, that same day the
Cohon and Gardner firm informed Disner that Mobil would not be using his
services. Gardner immediately faxed a letter to the Shapiro firm,
Disner, and Goebel, stating that Mobil objected to the Shapiro firm’s
participation in the case on behalf of respondents. Gardner's letter
asserted the Shapiro firm had an ethical conflict because of Cohon and
Gardner’s conversations with and disclosures to Disner concerning the
case. The Shapiro firm responded with a letter faxed the next day,
contending there was no basis for the firm’s disqualification. The
response stated that the Shapiro firm had already associated as counsel
for respondents when Disner met with the Cohon and Gardner attorneys.
The response also stated that Disner was of counsel to the Shapiro firm
and not an associate, partner, or shareholder.

Four days later, on July 22, 1996, Mobil filed an ex parte application
for an order shortening time for a motion to disqualify the Shapiro
firm. Mobil's motion was set for hearing on July 24, 1996. The moving
and opposing papers included declarations and exhibits setting out the
facts related above. In addition, Disner's declaration stated he had not
"discussed the merits of the SpeeDee Oil action with any attorney or
other employee" of the Shapiro firm. He also said he customarily
reviewed possible conflicts of interest with the firm before associating
with them on cases. Disner and the Shapiro firm did not discuss a
potential conflict in this instance because neither had asked the other
to associate for the SpeeDee Oil case. Similarly, Mitchell Shapiro
declared that he had "not discussed this action" with Disner and did not
know "what was discussed between" Disner and the Cohon and Gardner
attorneys.

The Shapiro firm's declarations submitted in opposition to Mobil's
motion provided additional details of the firm's relationship with
Disner. Disner's declaration stated: "Although I am designated as \`Of
Counsel' to SRC \[the Shapiro firm\], I have a separate law practice
from SRC. I have my own clients, whom I bill separately from SRC. I pay
rent to SRC for office space. I have my own staff whom I pay for their
services. I do not share in any profits of SRC, nor do I incur any
liabilities on behalf of SRC. In those few cases (perhaps 3-4 per year)
on which I associate with SRC, which is strictly determined on a
case-by-case basis, if I use any attorney from SRC to perform services,
I pay SRC a percentage of that attorney\[s\] usual hourly rate for the
time spent working on my clients' cases. Similarly, if SRC uses my
services on any cases, it pays me a percentage of my usual hourly fee
for services rendered.”

The trial court denied Mobil's motion to disqualify the Shapiro firm.
The court decided the matter based on the written submissions, stating:
“There is no basis on which to presume that Eliot Disner, Esq., who is
of counsel to the Shapiro firm, imparted any confidential information to
the firm, as concerns this case. Disner and the Shapiro firm were
initially unaware of each other's involvement in this case and Disner
was not retained by MOBIL nor is he presently involved in this case."

Court of Appeal affirmed the trial court's order, applying an abuse of
discretion standard of review. The court viewed the matter as one
involving conflicting evidence and inferences on the actual nature of
the particular "of counsel" relationship in question: "We agree that if
the Shapiro firm simultaneously represented both Mobil and the
respondents in this litigation, it would be subject to automatic
disqualification. And we assume for purposes of discussion that by
performing legal research for Mobil, Mr. Disner represented it. However,
the trial court impliedly concluded Mr. Disner practiced law separate
and apart from the Shapiro firm except on those few annual occasions
when Mr. Disner or the Shapiro firm associated the other on a particular
case. There was probative and persuasive evidence of a ‘close, personal,
continuous, and regular’ professional affinity which characterizes the
‘of counsel’ relationship. However, there was conflicting evidence which
indicated there was in reality no ‘close, personal, continuous, and
regular’ relationship. Simply stated, the evidence concerning the
relationship was in conflict and the trial judge resolved that dispute
in favor of one side. Furthermore, even if a concern for client
confidentiality arose on the facts of this case, substantial evidence
established Mr. Disner did not impart any confidential information to
the Shapiro firm. Therefore, we find no abuse of discretion.”

DISCUSSION

This case requires us to resolve two distinct questions. First, were
Disner's contacts and discussions with the Cohon and Gardner attorneys
such that he represented Mobil for purposes of a conflict of interest
analysis? Second, if so, should any conflict of interest be imputed to
the law firm to which he was of counsel so as to require its
disqualification? To answer these questions, we first review the
principles involved when one party seeks to disqualify its opponent's
counsel, beginning with the appropriate standard of appellate review.

DISQUALIFICATION PRINCIPLES

A motion to disqualify a party's counsel may implicate several important
interests. Consequently, judges must examine these motions carefully to
ensure that literalism does not deny the parties substantial justice.
Depending on the circumstances, a disqualification motion may involve
such considerations as a client’s right to chosen counsel, an attorney’s
interest in representing a client, the financial burden on a client to
replace disqualified counsel, and the possibility that tactical abuse
underlies the disqualification motion. Nevertheless, determining whether
a conflict of interest requires disqualification involves more than just
the interests of the parties.

A trial court’s authority to disqualify an attorney derives from the
power inherent in every court “\[t\]o control in furtherance of justice,
the conduct of its ministerial officers, and of all other persons in any
manner connected with a judicial proceeding before it, in every matter
pertaining thereto.” Ultimately, disqualification motions involve a
conflict between the clients’ right to counsel of their choice and the
need to maintain ethical standards of professional responsibility. The
paramount concern must be to preserve public trust in the scrupulous
administration of justice and the integrity of the bar. The important
right to counsel of one’s choice must yield to ethical considerations
that affect the fundamental principles of our judicial process.

Protecting the confidentiality of communications between attorney and
client is fundamental to our legal system. The attorney-client privilege
is a hallmark of our jurisprudence that furthers the public policy of
ensuring “‘the right of every person to freely and fully confer and
confide in one having knowledge of the law, and skilled in its practice,
in order that the former may have adequate advice and a proper
defense.’” To this end, a basic obligation of every attorney is “to
maintain inviolate the confidence, and at every peril to himself or
herself to preserve the secrets, of his or her client.”

To protect the confidentiality of the attorney-client relationship, the
State Bar Rules of Professional Conduct prohibits attorneys from
accepting, without the client's informed written consent, “employment
adverse to the client or former client where, by reason of the
representation of the client or former client, the attorney has obtained
confidential information material to the employment.” Where an attorney
successively represents clients with adverse interests, and where the
subjects of the two representations are substantially related, the need
to protect the first client's confidential information requires that the
attorney be disqualified from the second representation. For the same
reason, a presumption that an attorney has access to privileged and
confidential matters relevant to a subsequent representation extends the
attorney’s disqualification vicariously to the attorney’s entire firm.

A related but distinct fundamental value of our legal system is the
attorney's obligation of loyalty. Attorneys have a duty to maintain
undivided loyalty to their clients to avoid undermining public
confidence in the legal profession and the judicial process.The
effective functioning of the fiduciary relationship between attorney and
client depends on the client's trust and confidence in counsel. The
courts will protect clients' legitimate expectations of loyalty to
preserve this essential basis for trust and security in the
attorney-client relationship. Therefore, if an attorney—or more likely a
law firm—simultaneously represents clients who have conflicting
interests, a more stringent per se rule of disqualification applies.
With few exceptions, disqualification follows automatically, regardless
of whether the simultaneous representations have anything in common or
present any risk that confidences obtained in one matter would be used
in the other.

The most egregious conflict of interest is representation of clients
whose interests are directly adverse in the same litigation. Such
patently improper dual representation suggests to the clients—and to the
public at large—that the attorney is completely indifferent to the duty
of loyalty and the duty to preserve confidences. However, the attorney’s
actual intention and motives are immaterial, and the rule of automatic
disqualification applies. “The rule is designed not alone to prevent the
dishonest practitioner from fraudulent conduct,” but also to keep honest
attorneys from having to choose between conflicting duties, or being
tempted to reconcile conflicting interests, rather than fully pursuing
their clients’ rights. The loyalty the attorney owes one client cannot
be allowed to compromise the duty owed another.

Here, any concerns about compromised attorney loyalty must take into
account the limited period during which the Shapiro firm represented
respondents and Disner was engaged in communications with Mobil's
counsel. Mobil effectively ended the risk of divided loyalty by promptly
terminating Disner's services. However, the concern for client
confidences, like the attorney's duty to preserve those confidences,
continues after the attorney's services end. Therefore, we examine the
relationship between Disner and Mobil, conducted through Mobil’s
counsel, to determine whether Disner should be deemed to have
represented Mobil for purposes of a conflict of interest analysis.

CONSULTATION AND REPRESENTATION

In considering whether an attorney-client relationship has reached a
point where the attorney can be subject to disqualification for a
conflict of interest, we begin with the relationship's early stages, as
noted in *Beery v. State Bar*: “The fiduciary relationship existing
between lawyer and client extends to preliminary consultations by a
prospective client with a view to retention of the lawyer, although
actual employment does not result. When a party seeking legal advice
consults an attorney at law and secures that advice, the relation of
attorney and client is established prima facie. The absence of an
agreement with respect to the fee to be charged does not prevent the
relationship from arising.”

The primary concern is whether and to what extent the attorney acquired
confidential information. That question is not necessarily answered by
the amount of time involved. “Even the briefest conversation between a
lawyer and a client can result in the disclosure of confidences.”
Consequently, a formal retainer agreement is not required before
attorneys acquire fiduciary obligations of loyalty and confidentiality,
which begin when attorney-client discussions proceed beyond initial or
peripheral contacts. An attorney represents a client—for purposes of a
conflict of interest analysis—when the attorney knowingly obtains
material confidential information from the client and renders legal
advice or services as a result.

The initial discussions between Disner and the Cohon and Gardner
attorneys involved substantial amounts of material confidential
information. Moreover, Disner did not receive the information about
Mobil’s case theories, strategy, and analyses from a lay person who
might or might not be knowledgeable about which matters were
significant. Instead, after receiving the background information on the
case, Disner participated in an extended briefing with the attorneys
conducting Mobil’s defense against respondents' claims. Obviously,
communications of that kind are likely to involve an efficient transfer
of material confidential information and attorney work product.

The record here shows without contradiction that Disner received
material confidential information concerning respondents’ claims against
Mobil. In his first telephone conversation with one of Mobil's
attorneys, Disner discussed the substantive allegations, the procedural
status, and Mobil's theories of the case. During their luncheon meeting,
Mobil's attorneys again briefed Disner on Mobil’s theories and on its
attorneys' discovery strategy, analyses of the issues, and assessment of
the state of the case. Moreover, he acted on some of that information
and provided Mobil's attorneys with the results of his own research.
Although Disner stated that he did not discuss “the merits” of the case
with attorneys or employees of the Shapiro firm, the firm's declarations
fail to establish that Mobil's confidences were unavailable to its
adversaries' attorneys, or that effective screening procedures secured
those confidences from disclosure.

Therefore, the undisputed facts established that, for purposes of a
conflict of interest analysis, Disner represented Mobil. Consequently,
Disner and the firm to which he was of counsel, the Shapiro firm,
represented opposing parties in the same litigation. The potential for a
breach of the duty of confidentiality, whether inadvertent or otherwise,
is apparent. The record provides no basis for considering whether an
ethical screen, or other means of protecting Mobil's confidences, could
serve the same prophylactic purpose as disqualification. We turn, then,
to the reasons for applying the rule of disqualification to attorneys of
counsel to a firm.

IMPUTED DISQUALIFICATION AND “OF COUNSEL” ATTORNEYS

As amicus curiae, the State Bar of California, observes, “The ‘of
counsel’ designation has, over the years, come to mean a variety of
things in jurisdictions across the nation.” Attorneys who are of counsel
to a firm may be permanent full-time practitioners who for various
reasons are not on the traditional career path towards partnership in
the firm. Of counsel attorneys also may be part-time affiliates of a
firm who have other personal or professional commitments, or they may be
potential partners brought into a firm for a probationary period.

The minimum requirements for designating an attorney in California as
being of counsel to a firm are found among the standards for
communications that presumptively violate the prohibition against false
or deceptive communications: “A ‘communication’ which states or implies
that a member or law firm is \`of counsel' to another lawyer or a law
firm unless the former has a relationship with the latter (other than as
a partner or associate, or officer or shareholder pursuant to Business
and Professions Code sections 6160-6172) which is *close, personal,
continuous, and regular.*"”

We agree with the State Bar's view that the essence of the relationship
between a firm and an attorney of counsel to the firm "is the closeness
of the \`counsel' they share on client matters. Members of the public
are encouraged to consult with those sharing an \`of counsel'
relationship with the expectation that the counselling resources of both
are fully available to clients." The same view was reflected in the Bar
Association of San Francisco's Formal Opinion No. 1985-1: “A firm which
lists an attorney as ‘of counsel’ on its letterhead, shingle or listing
is making an affirmative representation to its clients that the services
of that attorney are available to clients of the firm."

As noted earlier, the need to protect client confidences can cause one
attorney's conflict of interest disqualification to be imputed to other
attorneys in the same firm. When attorneys presumptively share access to
privileged and confidential matters because they practice together in a
firm, the disqualification of one attorney extends vicariously to the
entire firm.

The vicarious disqualification rule recognizes the everyday reality that
attorneys, working together and practicing law in a professional
association, share each other's, and their clients', confidential
information. The expectation that attorneys associated together will
share confidences is reflected in the American Bar Association Model
Rules of Professional Conduct, rule 1.6, comment \[8\]: "Lawyers in a
firm may, in the course of the firm's practice, disclose to each other
information relating to a client of the firm, unless the client has
instructed that particular information be confined to specified
lawyers."

The close, personal, continuous, and regular relationship between a law
firm and the attorneys affiliated with it as of counsel contains many of
the same elements that justify the rule of vicarious disqualification
applied to partners, associates, and members. An of counsel attorney,
particularly one frequently in the firm's offices or in contact with the
firm's attorneys, may be consulted on a variety of matters without being
formally identified as co-counsel. This close, fluid, and continuing
relationship, with its attendant exchanges of information, advice, and
opinions, properly makes the of counsel attorney subject to the conflict
imputation rule, regardless of whether that attorney has any financial
stake in a particular matter.

We find persuasive amicus curiae the State Bar of California's
conclusion in its 1993 ethics opinion on the subject: "\[T\]o the extent
the relationship between a principal member \[of the State Bar\] or law
firm and another member or law firm is sufficiently \`close, personal,
regular and continuous,' such that one is held out to the public as \`of
counsel' for the other, the principal and \`of counsel' relationship
must be considered a single, de facto firm for purposes of rule 3-310.
Accordingly, if the \`of counsel' is precluded from a representation by
reason of rule 3-310 of the California Rules of Professional Conduct,
the principal is presumptively precluded as well, and vice-versa." The
American Bar Association Committee on Ethics and Professional
Responsibility reached the same conclusion in its Formal Opinion No.
90-357: "There can be no doubt that an of counsel lawyer (or firm) is
\`associated in' and has an \`association with' the firm (or firms) to
which the lawyer is of counsel, for purposes of both the general
imputation of disqualification ... and the imputation of
disqualification resulting from former government service.... Similarly,
the of counsel lawyer is \`affiliated' with the firm and its individual
lawyers for purposes of the general attribution of disqualifications
under DR 5-105(d) of the Model Code." Notwithstanding the variations to
be expected across the nation on any point of law, the prevailing view
is that for purposes of disqualification, the of counsel attorney is
considered to be affiliated with a firm so that the disqualification of
one from representation must be imputed to the other.

In order to designate themselves as of counsel, attorneys must have
close, personal, continuous, and regular relationships with their
affiliated firms. Consequently, the attorneys brought together in these
relationships frequently will have occasion to share client confidences
in the course of exchanging advice and performing legal services for
those clients. The fundamental nature of the relationship makes a
presumption of shared confidences as appropriate for the of counsel
attorney as it is for partners, associates, and members of law firms.
From the clients' and the public's perspective, the of counsel attorney
can hardly be distinguished from other attorneys who may be more closely
tied to a firm financially. As a result, the need to preserve
confidentiality and public confidence in the integrity of the legal
profession and judicial process require that of counsel attorneys be
regarded as the same as partners, associates, and members of law firms
for conflict of interest issues.

In this case, the of counsel attorney obtained confidential information
and provided legal services to Mobil. For conflict of interest purposes,
the attorney's involvement went beyond initial or peripheral contacts
and rose to the level for which fiduciary duties of confidentiality and
loyalty properly can be imposed. This development meant that Disner and
the Shapiro firm represented adversaries in the same litigation, with
the concomitant potential for a breach of the duty of confidentiality.

Disner's conflict of interest must be imputed to the Shapiro firm
because of the public designation of their relationship. Consequently,
Disner's conflict of interest must inevitably lead to the Shapiro firm's
vicarious disqualification from representing respondents to assure the
preservation of Mobil's confidences and the integrity of the judicial
process.

**Questions:**

1.  Why did the Supreme Court hold that the Shapiro firm was
    > disqualified from representing SpeeDee?

2.  How could the Shapiro firm have avoided disqualification?

3.  Could adopting a “firewall” have enabled the Shapiro firm to
    > represent SpeeDee?

[**<u>*Kala v. Aluminum Smelting & Refining Company, Inc.*, 81 Ohio St.
3d 1
(1998)</u>**](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=6669181594411401164)

> **Summary:** Attorney Pearson and the Spangenberg law firm represented
> Kala in an action against his former employer, Aluminum Smelting.
> During Kala’s appeal, Pearson left Spangenberg and joined the Duvin
> firm, which represented Aluminum Smelting in the same action. Kala
> filed a motion to disqualify Duvin, which the Ohio Supreme Court
> granted despite Duvin’s efforts to firewall Pearson, because of the
> strong appearance of impropriety.

LUNDBERG STRATTON, J.

The issue before the court is whether a law firm should be automatically
disqualified from representing a party when an attorney leaves his or
her former employment with a firm representing a party and joins the law
firm representing the opposing party, or whether that law firm may
overcome any presumption of shared confidences by instituting effective
screening mechanisms. Although this issue has been dealt with in many
other jurisdictions, this is a case of first impression for Ohio. To
fairly decide this issue, we must consider the Disciplinary Rules and
Ethical Considerations in the Ohio Code of Professional Responsibility,
competing public policy interests, and the guidance provided by federal
case law.

ETHICAL PRINCIPLES

A fundamental principle in the attorney-client relationship is that the
attorney shall maintain the confidentiality of any information learned
during the attorney-client relationship. A client must have the utmost
confidence in his or her attorney if the client is to feel free to
divulge all matters related to the case to his or her attorney.

The obligation of an attorney to preserve the confidences and secrets of
the client continues even after the termination of the attorney’s
employment.

In addition, an attorney should avoid even the appearance of
impropriety. Because of the importance of these ethical principles, it
is the court's duty to safeguard the preservation of the attorney-client
relationship. In doing so, a court helps to maintain public confidence
in the legal profession and assists in protecting the integrity of the
judicial proceeding.

When an attorney leaves his or her former employment and becomes
employed by a firm representing an opposing party, a presumption arises
that the attorney takes with him or her any confidences gained in the
former relationship and shares those confidences with the new firm. This
is known as the presumption of shared confidences. Some courts have held
that such a change of employment results in an irrebuttable presumption
of shared confidences that necessitates the disqualification of the
attorney (primary disqualification) and the entire new firm (imputed
disqualification).

CLIENT'S RIGHT TO CHOOSE COUNSEL

Balanced against the former client’s interest in preventing a breach of
confidence is the public policy interest in permitting the opposing
party's continued representation by counsel of his or her choice.
Disqualification interferes with a client's right to choose counsel.

“Disqualification, as a prophylactic device for protecting the
attorney-client relationship, is a drastic measure which courts should
hesitate to impose except when absolutely necessary. A disqualification
of counsel, while protecting the attorney-client relationship, also
serves to destroy a relationship by depriving a party of representation
of their own choosing.”

This issue has become increasingly important as the practice of law has
changed. A review of the historical development of disqualification
issues reveals the early conflicts created by the clash of the above
principles.

HISTORY OF MOTIONS TO DISQUALIFY

Many of the early disqualification cases arose out of charges of
conflict of interest where government attorneys left the public service
and went into private practice. Early courts struggled with the need to
fashion a rule that would preserve the confidences of the government
client yet not discourage able attorneys from entering public service
through fear of being locked forever into government service, unable to
change positions.

“If past employment in government results in the disqualification of
future employers from representing some of their long-term clients, it
seems clearly possible that government attorneys will be regarded as
‘Typhoid Marys.’ Many talented lawyers, in turn, may be unwilling to
spend a period in government service, if that service makes them
unattractive or risky for large law firms to hire.”

As more and more private attorneys also began changing firms, motions to
disqualify under the irrebuttable presumption of shared confidences
increased, and inequities and abuses also began to surface. While some
of these motions to disqualify were legitimate and necessary, such
motions were also often misused to harass an opponent, disrupt the
opponent's case, or to gain a tactical advantage, and therefore were
viewed with increasing caution.

As a result, several federal cases began fashioning a way to deal with
the competing interests caused by increased mobility of attorneys and
the rise of motions to disqualify. The Court of Appeals for the Sixth
Circuit in *Manning* summed up the changing practice of law as follows:

> Perhaps these motions have become more numerous simply because the
> changing nature of the manner in which legal services are delivered
> may present a greater number of potential conflicts. Certainly, the
> advent of law firms employing hundreds of lawyers engaging in a
> plethora of specialties contrasts starkly with the former
> preponderance of single practitioners and small firms engaging in only
> a few practice specialties. In addition, lawyers seem to be moving
> more freely from one association to another, and law firm mergers have
> become commonplace. At the same time that the potential for conflicts
> of interest has increased as the result of these phenomena, the
> availability of competent legal specialists has been concentrated
> under fewer roofs.
>
> Consequently, these new realities must be at the core of the balancing
> of interests necessarily undertaken when courts consider motions for
> vicarious disqualification of counsel.

As a result of the changing legal profession, federal courts and the ABA
Model Rules of Professional Conduct began allowing the use of various
mechanisms to isolate an attorney who had transferred employment.
Although originally applied only to government attorneys, these
mechanisms have now been extended to situations involving transfers of
private counsel as well.

DEVELOPMENT OF STANDARDS FOR DISQUALIFICATION

Several federal courts in addressing both primary and imputed
disqualification have devised a three-part test to determine whether
disqualification is proper when one attorney leaves a firm and joins
another firm representing an opposing party. We believe this test
adequately covers many different scenarios and will give the courts of
Ohio guidance on disqualification issues.

First, a court must determine whether a substantial relationship exists
between prior and present representations. If there is no substantial
relationship, then no ethical problem exists. For example, when an
attorney had represented a client in a trademark infringement case, the
Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit denied disqualification in a
later unrelated civil RICO case.

Second, if a substantial relationship is found between the current
matter and the prior matter, the court must examine whether the attorney
shared in the confidences and representation of the prior matter. There
is a presumption that such confidences would also be shared among
members of the prior firm, but that presumption may be rebutted.

In *Freeman*, the Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, in setting
the rules on primary disqualification, instructed the trial court that
it could “rely on any of a number of factors, among them being the size
of the law firm, the area of specialization of the attorney, the
attorney’s position in the firm, and the demeanor and credibility of
witnesses at the evidentiary hearing.”

If the presumption of shared confidences within the prior firm is
rebutted by such evidence, then there is again no need for primary
disqualification, as there are no confidences to be shared. However, if
that presumption is not rebutted, and the attorney does or is presumed
to possess client confidences, primary disqualification results, and a
presumption of shared confidences arises between the attorney and the
members of the attorney's new firm. The issue then is whether a
presumption of shared confidences will also disqualify the entire new
firm (imputed disqualification). Kala implies that this presumption
should be irrebuttable and that once an attorney, particularly one as
involved in the case as Pearson was, moves to opposing counsel's firm,
no steps can be taken to restore confidence so as to overcome the
appearance of impropriety; the entire firm must be disqualified.

Some courts have taken this approach. New Jersey has refused to adopt
the rebuttable-presumption approach, finding that there is no way to
overcome the appearance of impropriety in a "side-switching attorney"
case. The New Jersey courts cite the impossibility of proving when a
breach has been made, as those lawyers within the new firm are least
likely to divulge such information. Judge Orlofsky in Cardona explained:

"At the heart of every \`side-switching attorney' case is the suspicion
that by changing sides, the attorney has breached a duty of fidelity and
loyalty to a former client, a client who had freely shared with the
attorney secrets and confidences with the expectation that they would be
disclosed to no one else. It is for this reason that the \`appearance of
impropriety doctrine' was adopted to protect the public, our profession,
and those it serves. In short, this much maligned doctrine exists to
engender, protect and preserve the trust and confidence of clients."

On the other hand, with the realities of modern-day practice, as
discussed in the Manning case, such a hard-and-fast rule works an unfair
hardship also. Ultimately, one must have faith in the integrity of
members of the legal profession to honor their professional oath to
uphold the Code of Professional Responsibility, safeguarded by the
precautions required to rebut the presumption of shared confidences. If
used properly, the process of screening attorneys who possess client
confidences from other members of a firm can preserve those confidences
while avoiding the use of the motion to disqualify as a device to gain a
tactical advantage. Therefore, we believe that the fairer rule in
balancing the interests of the parties and the public is to allow the
presumption of shared confidences with members of the new firm to be
rebutted.

Thus, the third part of the test on disqualification is whether the
presumption of shared confidences with the new firm has been rebutted by
evidence that a "Chinese wall" has been erected so as to preserve the
confidences of the client.[2] The Chinese wall is the specific
institutional screening mechanisms that will prevent the flow of
confidential information from the quarantined attorney to other members
of the law firm.

Factors to be considered in deciding whether an effective screen has
been created are whether the law firm is sufficiently large and whether
the structural divisions of the firm are sufficiently separate so as to
minimize contact between the quarantined attorney and the others, the
likelihood of contact between the quarantined attorney and the specific
attorneys responsible for the current representation, the existence of
safeguards or procedures which prevent the quarantined attorney from
access to relevant files or other information relevant to the present
litigation, prohibited access to files and other information on the
case, locked case files with keys distributed to a select few, secret
codes necessary to access pertinent information on electronic hardware,
instructions given to all members of a new firm regarding the ban on
exchange of information, and the prohibition of the sharing of fees
derived from such litigation.

A very strict standard of proof must be applied to the rebuttal of this
presumption of shared confidences, however, and any doubts as to the
existence of an asserted conflict of interest must be resolved in favor
of disqualification in order to dispel any appearance of impropriety.

Some courts have held that unrebutted affidavits attesting to a Chinese
wall are sufficient to prevent disqualification. However, we reject such
a bright-line test, as the court should maintain discretion to weigh
issues of credibility. The court should be free to assess the reputation
of an attorney and law firm for integrity and honesty. The court should
also be free to balance the appearance of impropriety against the
protections of a Chinese wall. For example, suppose a sole practitioner
representing a plaintiff switches sides to a five-person defense firm
representing the opposing party, leaving his former client to seek new
counsel. The appearance of impropriety in such a fact pattern may be
impossible to overcome.

If applied properly, screening mechanisms to insulate a quarantined
attorney from the rest of the firm can protect client confidences while
allowing for attorney mobility and the right of a client to choose
counsel.

ADDITIONAL FACTORS TO CONSIDER IN MOTIONS TO DISQUALIFY

In addition to the screening devices, there are other important factors
to be considered by the trial court. First, the screening devices must
be employed as soon as the disqualifying event occurs. Very few cases
address how early the disqualifying event occurs. In the *Manning* case,
a conflict arose with the attorney's former firm only after the
attorney, with the former client's knowledge, had moved to an uninvolved
law firm. In *Cromley*, the attorney and the new firm agreed that
“absolutely nothing of a substantive nature regarding the instant
lawsuit would occur until decisions were made and the clients were made
aware of them.” Other cases reviewed have been silent as to the issue of
when screening procedures were timely employed, although all cases agree
that the screens must be in place when the attorney joins the firm.
Instituting screens after a motion to disqualify is too late.
Accordingly, a court must weigh the timeliness of the screening devices.

A second factor to consider is the hardship that a client would incur in
obtaining new counsel if a motion to disqualify is granted. Hardship may
be more of an issue if a conflict arose after a transfer. However,
hardship may not carry much weight in a “side-switching” case.
Ironically, where an attorney switches sides and joins an opposing
counsel’s firm, the attorney has de facto deprived his or her first
client of the attorney of that client's choice, namely himself or
herself. If the attorney has been lead counsel, other counsel in the
firm must spend time and effort to take over the lead. If no one
remaining in the prior firm is able to handle the matter, or if the
attorney was a sole practitioner, the former client must seek out new
counsel and incur the burden and expense created by the switch. In this
scenario, the departing attorney has created a competing hardship for
his or her former client, and the claim by the new firm of hardship
created by its own doing in accepting the new attorney into the firm may
no longer be persuasive. These are matters that should be left to the
trier of fact to weigh.

In addition, a law firm contemplating hiring counsel who had been
directly involved on the opposing side also has a duty to disclose to
its own client that such a hiring may place the firm in conflict and
could result in disqualification. The law firm may have to subordinate
its desire to augment its staff against its duties to its client and
avoid placing the firm's interests above the client's interests.

Finally, the court should hold an evidentiary hearing on a motion to
disqualify and must issue findings of fact if requested based on the
evidence presented. Because a request for disqualification implies a
charge of unethical conduct, the challenged firm must be given an
opportunity to defend not only its relationship with the client, but
also its good name, reputation and ethical standards. In *Analytica*,
the Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit summarized the situation as
follows:

> An attorney’s and/or a law firm’s most valuable asset is their
> professional reputation for competence, and above all honesty and
> integrity, which should not be jeopardized in a summary type of
> disqualification proceeding of this nature. As court proceedings are
> matters of public record, a news media report concerning a summary
> disqualification order, based on a scant record of this type, can do
> irreparable harm to an attorney's or law firm's professional
> reputation. We must recognize that the great majority of lawyers, as
> officers of the court, do conduct themselves well within the bounds of
> the Code of Professional Responsibility.

THE REBUTTABLE-PRESUMPTION TEST FOR MOTIONS TO DISQUALIFY

In conclusion, we hold that in ruling on a motion for disqualification
of either an individual (primary disqualification) or the entire firm
(imputed disqualification) when an attorney has left a law firm and
joined a firm representing the opposing party, a court must hold an
evidentiary hearing and issue findings of fact using a three-part
analysis:

> \(1\) Is there a substantial relationship between the matter at issue
> and the matter of the former firm’s prior representation;
>
> \(2\) If there is a substantial relationship between these matters, is
> the presumption of shared confidences within the former firm rebutted
> by evidence that the attorney had no personal contact with or
> knowledge of the related matter; and
>
> \(3\) If the attorney did have personal contact with or knowledge of
> the related matter, did the new law firm erect adequate and timely
> screens to rebut a presumption of shared confidences with the new firm
> so as to avoid imputed disqualification?

APPLICATION OF TEST TO THIS CASE

Under the facts of this case, Pearson clearly met the
substantial-relationship test and possessed client confidences, as he
was the lead attorney on Kala's lawsuit. Thus, the first two parts of
the test require disqualification of Pearson and raise a presumption in
favor of disqualification of Duvin. No one disputes that Pearson,
himself, cannot work further on the case.

Therefore, we must determine whether the entire firm should be
disqualified under the third part of the analysis, imputed
disqualification. The appellate court took evidence in the form of
affidavits but denied the parties oral argument. The appellate order
consisted of the following findings:

"Motion by appellant to disqualify counsel for defendants/appellees is
granted. Appellee's new counsel shall file a notice of appearance on or
before May 31, 1996."

Therefore, we must examine the record we have before us, which consists
of exhibits and affidavits filed while the parties were briefing the
disqualification question in the court of appeals.

Kala retained Pearson and the Spangenberg firm in 1993 as his attorneys.
From 1993 through 1995, Kala trusted Pearson, relied upon him as his
attorney, and disclosed all matters pertaining to his case involving his
former employer, Aluminum Smelting. Pearson proceeded to file an appeal
after the directed verdict and apparently even participated in a
settlement conference with the Eighth District Court of Appeals on
November 13, 1995. On January 8, 1996, Pearson obtained a continuance to
file Kala's appellate brief. On January 22, 1996, Pearson left the
Spangenberg firm and joined the Duvin firm, which was representing
Aluminum Smelting and had been throughout the prior proceedings with
Kala. The only conclusion that can be reached from the record is that
Pearson was negotiating with Duvin while still actively representing
Kala without disclosing to Kala his negotiations.

The appearance of impropriety is so strong that nothing that the Duvin
firm could have done would have had any effect on Kala's perception that
his personal attorney had abandoned him with all of his shared
confidences and joined the firm representing his adversary while the
case was still pending. No steps of any kind could possibly replace the
trust and confidence that Kala had in his attorney or in the legal
system if such representation is permitted. This is the classic
"side-switching attorney" case.

We find that under this set of egregious facts, the appearance of
impropriety was so great that the attempts made by Duvin to erect a
Chinese wall were insufficient to overcome the appearance of
impropriety. Accordingly, we affirm the disqualification ruling of the
court of appeals.

Questions:

1.  

Further Reading:

- 

[1] Mr. Fleischmann's personal participation in the Buffalo litigation
was minimal, and we are confident that he would make every effort to
disassociate himself from both lawsuits and would not divulge any
information that came to him concerning either. However, we cannot
impart this same confidence to the public by court order.

[2] “Chinese wall" has become the legal term to describe a “procedure
which permits an attorney involved in an earlier adverse role to be
screened from other attorneys in the firm so as to prevent
disqualification of the entire law firm simply because one member of
firm previously represented a client who is now an adversary of the
client currently represented by the firm.” Black's Law Dictionary (6
Ed.Rev.1990) 240. This term refers historically to the Great Wall of
China, which served ancient Chinese emperors as a barrier to invasion.
Ironically, however, the Great Wall of China was of limited military
value. The concept is also referred to in cases and commentary as
"screening devices," "ethical screens," or "institutional mechanisms for
screening." \[Editor’s note: Screening procedures are now typically
called “firewalls.”\]
