**6.3: The Attorney-Client Privilege**

*Nobody knows, nobody sees. Nobody knows, but me.*[1]

The “attorney-client privilege” is an evidentiary privilege that
protects certain confidential communications between attorneys and their
clients. Attorneys have a fiduciary duty of confidentiality that
prohibits them from disclosing any confidential client information
unless their client consents or they are required to disclose by law.
The attorney-client privilege resembles the duty of confidentiality, but
provides broader protection for particular kinds of confidential
communications.

Specifically, the attorney-client privilege applies to confidential
attorney-client communications for the purpose of obtaining legal
advice. All confidential client information is protected by the duty of
confidentiality, but only confidential attorney-client communications
for the purpose of obtaining legal advice are protected by the
attorney-client privilege.

The attorney-client privilege provides broader protection than the duty
of confidentiality. The government can require the disclosure of
confidential client information in circumstances where it could not
require the disclosure of privileged attorney-client communications. In
fact, the government can rarely require the disclosure of privileged
information, and courts interpret the exceptions to attorney-client
privilege quite narrowly. But they also interpret the scope of the
attorney-client privilege quite strictly. The attorney-client privilege
is quite strong, when it applies. But it only applies to certain kinds
of communications, and it is easy to lose.

To begin with, the “Third Party Doctrine” provides that the
attorney-client privilege only protects confidential attorney-client
communications. In other words, if a third-party receives the
communication, then it is not privileged, although it may still be
confidential. So, if anyone other than the attorney and the client
participate in the communication, then it is not privileged.

Moreover, the attorney-client privilege only covers communications for
the purpose of obtaining legal advice. If an attorney-client
communication does not concern legal advice, then it is not privileged,
even if it is confidential. The attorney-client privilege does not cover
business advice, or other non-legal advice.

In addition, the attorney-client privilege is easily destroyed. Like the
duty of confidentiality, the attorney-client privilege belongs to the
client, not the attorney. Accordingly, only the client can waive the
privilege, not the attorney. But the client waives the privilege by
disclosing privileged information to a third-party, whether or not the
client intended to waive the privilege. By contrast, information remains
“confidential” until it is “generally known.”

Attorneys should emphasize to their clients the fragility of the
attorney-client privilege. Clients should know that any disclosure to a
third-party destroys the privilege, regardless of the context. Some
courts have even held that inadvertent disclosure destroys the
privilege.

**Identifying Privileged Information**

The definition of communications protected by the attorney-client
privilege may differ slightly from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
However, as a general rule, information is protected by the
attorney-client privilege only if:

1.  An attorney-client relationship existed when the communication
    > occurred;

2.  The information was confidential and not shared with any
    > third-parties; and

3.  The information was communicated for the purpose of obtaining legal
    > advice.

So, the attorney-client privilege only applies to communications made in
the context of an attorney-client relationship. Of course, the privilege
applies whether the attorney-client relationship is express or implied.
But if no attorney-client relationship had formed or the attorney-client
relationship had ended when the communication occurred, then the
information is not privileged, although it may still be protected by the
duty of confidentiality.

In addition, the attorney-client privilege only applies to information
that is absolutely confidential. If the information is disclosed to any
third-parties, it is not privileged, although it may still be protected
by the duty of confidentiality. This limitation applies to third-parties
who participate in the initial communication as well as third-parties
who receive the communication after the fact. If a lawyer with whom the
client lacks an attorney-client relationship receives the information,
then it is not privileged. And if a non-lawyer who is not part of the
attorney-client relationship receives the information, then it is not
privileged. Notably, the “joint-defense privilege” or “common defense
rule” provides that joint defendants can share certain confidential
information under certain circumstances, without destroying the
privilege.

Finally, the attorney-client privilege only protects information
communicated for the purpose of obtaining legal advice. Confidential
communication between attorneys and clients for the purpose of obtaining
non-legal advice are not privileged, although they may be protected by
the duty of confidentiality. Attorneys often provide non-legal advice to
their clients, especially when those lawyers are employees of companies.
Such non-legal advice is not protected by the attorney-client privilege.

The attorney-client privilege belongs to the client, not the attorney.
Accordingly, only the client can waive the privilege. And clients can
waive the privilege either intentionally or unintentionally. Attorneys
should explicitly inform their clients that sharing privileged
information with any third-party will destroy the privilege, and
discourage their clients from sharing any privileged information without
consultation.

Sometimes, attorneys or clients inadvertently disclose privileged
information to third-parties. Different courts treat such disclosures
differently. Some courts hold that accidental disclosure does not
destroy the privilege, and that the recipient of the information must
return or destroy it, and may not use it. Other courts hold that
accidental disclosure does destroy the privilege. In those courts, an
attorney may accidentally destroy the privilege, even though the
attorney lacks the authority to waive the privilege.

While the attorney-client privilege is quite strong, when it applies,
there are certain exceptions to the privilege.

There are a number of exceptions to the attorney-client privilege. Chief
among them is the “crime-fraud exception,” which provides that the
privilege does not protect attorney-client communications made for the
purpose of committing or furthering a crime, fraud, or tort. However,
the exception applies only if the crime, fraud, or tort actually occurs.
For example, confidential communications between clients and attorneys
for the purpose of determining whether an action is a crime, fraud, or
tort are protected by the privilege, so long as the crime, fraud, or
tort in question is not actually committed.

**The Purpose of the Attorney-Client Privilege**

<img src="/assets/images/image1.png" style="width:6.5in;height:8.41667in" />

[**<u>*People v. Belge*, 83 Misc. 2d 186 (NY County Court
1975)</u>**](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=9441243257336706772)

> **Summary:** Robert F. Garrow, Jr. was charged with murder and
> represented by Frank H. Armani and Francis R. Belge, who presented an
> insanity defense. In the course of representation, Garrow disclosed
> three other murders to his attorneys. Based on information provided by
> Garrow, Belge discovered the body of one of the victims, but did not
> disclose it to the police until the trial.

Ormand N. Gale, J.

In the summer of 1973 Robert F. Garrow, Jr., stood charged in Hamilton
County with the crime of murder. The defendant was assigned two
attorneys, Frank H. Armani and Francis R. Belge. A defense of insanity
had been interposed by counsel for Mr. Garrow. During the course of the
discussions between Garrow and his two counsel, three other murders were
admitted by Garrow, one being in Onondaga County. On or about September
of 1973 Mr. Belge conducted his own investigation based upon what his
client had told him and with the assistance of a friend the location of
the body of Alicia Hauck was found in Oakwood Cemetery in Syracuse. Mr.
Belge personally inspected the body and was satisfied, presumably, that
this was the Alicia Hauck that his client had told him that he murdered.

This discovery was not disclosed to the authorities, but became public
during the trial of Mr. Garrow in June of 1974, when to affirmatively
establish the defense of insanity, these three other murders were
brought before the jury by the defense in the Hamilton County trial.
Public indignation reached the fever pitch, statements were made by the
District Attorney of Onondaga County relative to the situation and he
caused the Grand Jury of Onondaga County, then sitting, to conduct a
thorough investigation. As a result of this investigation Frank Armani
was no-billed by the Grand Jury but Indictment No. 75-55 was returned as
against Francis R. Belge, Esq., accusing him of having violated
subdivision 1 of section 4200 of the Public Health Law, which, in
essence, requires that a decent burial be accorded the dead, and section
4143 of the Public Health Law, which, in essence, requires anyone
knowing of the death of a person without medical attendance, to report
the same to the proper authorities. Defense counsel moves for a
dismissal of the indictment on the grounds that a confidential,
privileged communication existed between him and Mr. Garrow, which
should excuse the attorney from making full disclosure to the
authorities.

The National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, as amicus curiae,
succinctly state the issue in the following language: If this indictment
stands, “The attorney-client privilege will be effectively destroyed. No
defendant will be able to freely discuss the facts of his case with his
attorney. No attorney will be able to listen to those facts without
being faced with the Hobson’s choice of violating the law or violating
his professional code of Ethics.”

Initially in England the practice of law was not recognized as a
profession, and certainly some people are skeptics today. However, the
practice of learned and capable men appearing before the court on behalf
of a friend or an acquaintance became more and more demanding.
Consequently, the King granted a privilege to certain of these men to
engage in such practice. There had to be rules governing their duties.
These came to be known as “Canons.” The King has, in this country, been
substituted by a democracy, but the “Canons” are with us today, having
been honed and refined over the years to meet the changes of time. Most
are constantly being studied and revamped by the American Bar
Association and by the bar associations of the various States. While
they are, for the most part, general by definition, they can be brought
to bear in a particular situation. Among those is the following, cited
in *United States v. Funk*: “Confidential communications between an
attorney and his client are privileged from disclosure as a rule of
necessity in the administration of justice.”

In the most recent issue of the New York State Bar Journal there is an
article by Jack B. Weinstein, entitled “Educating Ethical Lawyers.” In a
subcaption to this article is the following language which is pertinent:
“The most difficult ethical dilemmas result from the frequent conflicts
between the obligation to one’s client and those to the legal system and
to society. It is in this area that legal education has its greatest
responsibility, and can have its greatest effects.” In the course of his
article Mr. Weinstein states that there are three major types of
pressure facing a practicing lawyer. He uses the following language to
describe these: “First, there are those that originate in the attorney’s
search for his own wellbeing. Second, pressures arise from the
attorney’s obligation to his client. Third, the lawyer has certain
obligations to the courts, the legal system, and society in general.”

Our system of criminal justice is an adversary system and the interests
of the State are not absolute, or even paramount. “The dignity of the
individual is respected to the point that even when the citizen is known
by the state to have committed a heinous offense, the individual is
nevertheless accorded such rights as counsel, trial by jury, due
process, and the privilege against self incrimination.”

A trial is in part a search for truth, but it is only partly a search
for truth. The mantle of innocence is flung over the defendant to such
an extent that he is safeguarded by rules of evidence which frequently
keep out absolute truth, much to the chagrin of juries. Nevertheless,
this has been a part of our system since our laws were taken from the
laws of England and over these many years has been found to best protect
a balance between the rights of the individual and the rights of
society.

The concept of the right to counsel has again been with us for a long
time, but since the decision of *Gideon v. Wainwright*, it has been
extended more and more so that at the present time a defendant is
entitled to have counsel at a parole hearing or a probation violation
hearing.

The effectiveness of counsel is only as great as the confidentiality of
its client-attorney relationship. If the lawyer cannot get all the facts
about the case, he can only give his client half of a defense. This, of
necessity, involves the client telling his attorney everything remotely
connected with the crime.

Apparently, in the instant case, after analyzing all the evidence, and
after hearing of the bizarre episodes in the life of their client, they
decided that the only possibility of salvation was in a defense of
insanity. For the client to disclose not only everything about this
particular crime but also everything about other crimes which might have
a bearing upon his defense, requires the strictest confidence in, and on
the part of, the attorney.

When the facts of the other homicides became public, as a result of the
defendant’s testimony to substantiate his claim of insanity, “Members of
the public were shocked at the apparent callousness of these lawyers,
whose conduct was seen as typifying the unhealthy lack of concern of
most lawyers with the public interest and with simple decency.” A hue
and cry went up from the press and other news media suggesting that the
attorneys should be found guilty of such crimes as obstruction of
justice or becoming an accomplice after the fact. From a layman’s
standpoint, this certainly was a logical conclusion. However, the
Constitution of the United States of America attempts to preserve the
dignity of the individual and to do that guarantees him the services of
an attorney who will bring to the Bar and to the Bench every conceivable
protection from the inroads of the State against such rights as are
vested in the Constitution for one accused of crime. Among those
substantial constitutional rights is that a defendant does not have to
incriminate himself. His attorneys were bound to uphold that concept and
maintain what has been called a sacred trust of confidentiality.

The following language from the brief of the amicus curiae further
points up the statements just made: “The client's Fifth Amendment rights
cannot be violated by his attorney. There is no viable distinction
between the personal papers and criminal evidence in the hands or mind
of the client. Because the discovery of the body of Alicia Hauck would
have presented ‘a significant link in a chain of evidence tending to
establish his guilt,’ Garrow was constitutionally exempt from any
statutory requirement to disclose the location of the body. And Attorney
Belge, as Garrow’s attorney, was not only equally exempt, but under a
positive stricture precluding such disclosure. Garrow, although
constitutionally privileged against a requirement of compulsory
disclosure, was free to make such a revelation if he chose to do so.
Attorney Belge was affirmatively required to withhold disclosure. The
criminal defendant’s self-incrimination rights become completely
nugatory if compulsory disclosure can be exacted through his attorney.”

In the recent and landmark case of *United States v. Nixon* the court
stated: “the constitutional need for production of relevant evidence in
a criminal proceeding is specific and neutral to the fair adjudication
of a particular criminal case in the administration of justice. Without
access to specific facts a criminal prosecution may be totally
frustrated.” In the case at bar we must weigh the importance of the
general privilege of confidentiality in the performance of the
defendant’s duties as an attorney, against the inroads of such a
privilege on the fair administration of criminal justice as well as the
heart tearing that went on in the victim's family by reason of their
uncertainty as to the whereabouts of Alicia Hauck. In this type of
situation the court must balance the rights of the individual against
the rights of society as a whole. There is no question but Attorney
Belge’s failure to bring to the attention of the authorities the
whereabouts of Alicia Hauck when he first verified it, prevented
bringing Garrow to the immediate bar of justice for this particular
murder. This was in a sense, obstruction of justice. This duty, I am
sure, loomed large in the mind of Attorney Belge. However, against this
was the Fifth Amendment right of his client, Garrow, not to incriminate
himself. If the Grand Jury had returned an indictment charging Mr. Belge
with obstruction of justice under a proper statute, the work of this
court would have been much more difficult than it is.

There must always be a conflict between the obstruction of the
administration of criminal justice and the preservation of the right
against self incrimination which permeates the mind of the attorney as
the alter ego of his client. But that is not the situation before this
court. We have the Fifth Amendment right, derived from the Constitution,
on the one hand, as against the trivia of a pseudo-criminal statute on
the other, which has seldom been brought into play. Clearly the latter
is completely out of focus when placed alongside the client-attorney
privilege. An examination of the Grand Jury testimony sheds little light
on their reasoning. The testimony of Mr. Armani added nothing new to the
facts as already presented to the Grand Jury. He and Mr. Belge were
cocounsel. Both were answerable to the Canons of professional ethics.
The Grand Jury chose to indict one and not the other. It appears as if
that body were grasping at straws.

It is the decision of this court that Francis R. Belge conducted himself
as an officer of the court with all the zeal at his command to protect
the constitutional rights of his client. Both on the grounds of a
privileged communication and in the interests of justice the indictment
is dismissed.

**Questions:**

1.  You may find this
    > [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kYN9gTZJB-I) and
    > this [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a75rWiG2RRg)
    > about the *People v. Belge* case interesting. You might also
    > consider listening to this *Radiolab* [podcast
    > episode](https://www.wnycstudios.org/podcasts/radiolab/articles/the_buried_bodies_case)
    > about the case.

2.  Why did the court hold that the attorney-client privilege superseded
    > the criminal law requiring Belge to disclose the location of the
    > victim’s body? Do you agree?

3.  What if Garrow had not been convicted of any other crime? Would the
    > attorney-client privilege have prevented Belge from disclosing the
    > location of the victim’s body indefinitely?

4.  What if Belge had reason to believe the victim was still alive?
    > Would the privilege have prevented him from disclosing the
    > victim’s location?

**The Scope of the Attorney-Client Privilege**

[**<u>*Colton v. United States*, 306 F. 2d 633 (2d Cir.
1962)</u>**](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=15476024987224469239)

> **Summary:** Attorney Edward E. Colton represented Herbert and
> Mercedes Matter in relation to their taxes. The IRS began an
> investigation of the Matters, and asked Colton to provide testimony
> and relevant documents. Colton refused, citing the attorney-client
> privilege. The district court ordered Colton to answer certain
> questions and produce certain documents, and the circuit court
> affirmed, holding that those questions and documents were not
> privileged.

LUMBARD, Chief Judge.

These appeals raise questions concerning the propriety of a virtually
complete refusal by tax counsel, primarily on the ground of the
attorney-client privilege, to answer questions and produce files at an
examination conducted by special agents of the Internal Revenue Service
concerning the tax liability of a client. We hold that it was proper to
require counsel to answer questions concerning the years during which
they performed legal services and the general nature of the services. We
also affirm the order requiring counsel to produce certain documents or
files and to answer relevant questions concerning the nature of papers
in their possession.

At some time prior to July 29, 1960, the Internal Revenue Service began
an investigation into the tax liabilities of Herbert Matter and his
wife, Mercedes, apparently with a view to possible criminal prosecution.
On July 29, 1960, the Service served identical summonses upon Edward E.
Colton, an attorney, and Lillian Kaltman, an attorney associated with
Mr. Colton, directing them to appear in New York City before special
agent Anton Kurtzuk on August 9, 1960 to give testimony and to bring
with them and produce “retained copies of income tax returns,
workpapers, correspondence files, memoranda and all other data relating
to the preparation and the filing of Federal Income Tax Returns for or
on the behalf of the Matters covering and including the years 1951
through 1958.” The appellants state, and the government does not deny,
that special agent Kurtzuk informed Miss Kaltman that “he wished to
question the attorneys about the reasons which the taxpayers gave their
counsel for filing certain tax returns late”; an affidavit submitted by
agent Kurtzuk below states the primary purpose of the investigation in
similar language. The Service later consented to the adjournment of the
return date of the summonses to September 21, 1960.

On September 20, 1960, the appellants obtained from the district court
an order requiring the government to show cause why the summonses should
not be quashed or modified and staying compliance. The appellants stated
that “the subject matter of Mr. Kurtzuk’s proposed inquiry would so
flagrantly induce a violation of their duty to the taxpayers arising out
of the relationship of attorney and client that this petition was deemed
necessary by the petitioners.” Pending the hearing of the petition, the
appellants entered into a stipulation with the government that the above
quoted portion of the summonses be amended to add the phrase “except for
such portions of said testimony and production that are within the
attorney-client privilege.” Pursuant to further terms of the stipulation
the appellants appeared to testify on November 23, 1960; the stipulation
provided that if the appearance was not accepted by the Service as
adequate compliance with the summonses, then the petition to quash
should proceed for hearing in the district court.

At the November 23 hearing, Mr. Colton and Miss Kaltman testified only
that the Matters were clients of their firm, refusing to give any
substantial information as to the firm’s role, if any, in preparing the
tax returns in question. They had with them records of the firm
pertaining to the Matters, but refused to turn them over to the agents
for examination without the consent of the Matters. Virtually all of the
questions asked by the agents were objected to on the basis of the
attorney-client privilege. Dissatisfied with the results of the hearing,
the government caused the appellants’ pending motion to quash to come on
for hearing in the district court, on February 28, 1961. Judge Dawson
denied the motion and vacated the stay without opinion, and Mr. Colton
and Miss Kaltman filed their notice of appeal to this court.

Apparently the Internal Revenue Service requested Colton to return for
further questioning and he refused. The Service on March 7, 1961 served
on Colton alone a new summons in substance identical to the earlier ones
as modified by the stipulation. Colton again appeared on March 24, 1961,
in response to this second summons, but gave the Service no more
satisfaction than he had at his first appearance, again declining on the
basis of the attorney-client privilege to answer certain questions
concerning tax work his firm might have done for the Matters.

Colton now offers to answer by affidavit thirteen of the questions he
objected to at the March 24, 1961 hearing, and the government has
accepted the offer, making the appeal moot insofar as these questions
are concerned. The remaining questions, all of which were objected to as
infringing upon the attorney-client privilege, may be grouped under two
general headings: those inquiring into the date and nature of the
services performed by the Colton firm for the Matters, and those
relating to the files of the firm which the Service sought to have Mr.
Colton turn over to it.

Those questions which pertain to the date and general nature of the
legal services performed by the Colton firm for the Matters should be
answered as they do not call for any confidential communication. The
question numbered 16 in the Internal Revenue Service's transcript of the
hearing, although ambiguous,[2] appears to inquire whether in 1951 the
firm performed any services for the Matters other than the preparation
of income tax returns. (Colton now agrees to answer the preceding
question, which asked whether or not the firm had prepared, or caused to
be prepared, a 1951 tax return.) Question 18 asked Colton to state the
nature of the services he admitted to having rendered the Matters in the
years prior to 1951. In directing Colton to answer this question, Judge
Metzner limited the required information to “general responses, such as
‘litigation,’ ‘drafting of documents,’ ‘tax advice’ and the like,” thus
excluding inquiry into specific details; since the government does not
here contest this interpretation, the question remains so limited for
our purposes. Questions 52 and 54 inquire whether the firm performed any
legal services for the Matters during 1954, 1955, 1956 and 1957.
Question 55 asks whether the firm received “any remunerations” for legal
services during those four years. Finally, Question 80 asks, “Did you or
any member of your firm cause to have prepared a 1953 income tax return
for or on behalf of Herbert and Mercedes Matter in 1954?”

This court has accepted, and few if any lawyers would quarrel with, Dean
Wigmore's statement of the basic principle underlying the
attorney-client privilege:

> In order to promote freedom of consultation of legal advisers by
> clients, the apprehension of compelled disclosure by the legal
> advisers must be removed; hence the law must prohibit such disclosure
> except on the client’s consent.

It cannot be seriously argued that this policy justifies any member of
the bar from refusing to testify as to all transactions he may have had
with any person whom he chooses to designate a “client.” Thus, according
to Judge Wyzanski’s much quoted formulation, it must be shown that:

> \(1\) the asserted holder of the privilege is or sought to become a
> client; (2) the person to whom the communication was made (a) is a
> member of the bar of a court, or his subordinate and (b) in connection
> with this communication is acting as a lawyer; (3) the communication
> relates to a fact of which the attorney was informed (a) by his client
> (b) without the presence of strangers (c) for the purpose of securing
> primarily either (i) an opinion on law or (ii) legal services or (iii)
> assistance in some legal proceeding, and not (d) for the purpose of
> committing a crime or tort; and (4) the privilege has been (a) claimed
> and (b) not waived by the client.

There can, of course, be no question that the giving of tax advice and
the preparation of tax returns — which unquestionably constituted a very
substantial part of the legal services rendered the Matters by the
Colton firm — are basically matters sufficiently within the professional
competence of an attorney to make them prima facie subject to the
attorney-client privilege. But, although the word “communications” must
be broadly interpreted in this context, the authorities are clear that
the privilege extends essentially only to the substance of matters
communicated to an attorney in professional confidence. Thus the
identity of a client, or the fact that a given individual has become a
client are matters which an attorney normally may not refuse to
disclose, even though the fact of having retained counsel may be used as
evidence against the client. To be sure, there may be circumstances
under which the identification of a client may amount to the prejudicial
disclosure of a confidential communication, as where the substance of a
disclosure has already been revealed but not its source.

We find, however, no such special circumstances in the case at bar. Nor
was the permissible inquiry in this regard ended when Colton stated that
the Matters were his clients and had been for some time. The principle
that permits inquiry into the existence of a professional relationship
obviously also permits questioning as to the years during which the
relationship has continued. Thus, under the accepted doctrine, there was
no basis for Colton’s refusal to answer Questions 52 and 54.

For similar reasons there was no basis for Colton’s refusal to state, in
answer to Question 55, whether he had received any remuneration from the
Matters for legal services rendered during the years 1954 through 1957.
Although no question as to the relevancy of the matters inquired into is
before us, we note that the government states that this question is
relevant to a determination whether the attorney-client relationship
actually existed, as well as to the propriety of deductions for legal
fees taken by the taxpayers in their returns for those years. Such
matters are surely relevant, and — in the absence of allegations as to
special circumstances — we see no reason why an attorney should be any
less subject to questioning about fees received from a taxpayer than
should any other person who has dealt with the taxpayer. There is no
further encroachment here upon any confidential relationship than there
is in questioning about the existence or date of the relationship. All
these matters are quite separate and apart from the substance of
anything that the client may have revealed to the attorney.

Moreover, a determination whether Colton rendered legal services to the
Matters in a given year is proper as a basis for obtaining further
unprivileged information from him. Not all communications between an
attorney and his client are privileged. Particularly in the case of an
attorney preparing a tax return (as the questioning agent attempted to
establish Colton did for the Matters), a good deal of information
transmitted to an attorney by a client is not intended to be
confidential, but rather is given for transmittal by the attorney to
others — for example, for inclusion in the tax return. Such information
is, of course, not privileged.

It was also proper for agent Kurtzuk, in Questions 16 and 18, to inquire
into the nature of the “legal services” rendered by Colton. Attorneys
frequently give to their clients business or other advice which, at
least insofar as it can be separated from their essentially professional
legal services, gives rise to no privilege whatever. Indeed, Colton
admitted at the Service hearing that he sometimes gave “a little
investment advice” to his clients. Because Colton's work for the Matters
— both legal and non-legal — may thus have involved unprivileged
communications with them, it is proper for the Service in its search for
unprivileged matters not only to inquire into the years during which he
rendered “legal services” but also to explore, as it does in Questions
16 and 18, to some extent the nature of the services rendered. These
questions are appropriate to a determination of what, if any, areas may
be inquired into further and what is protected by the attorney-client
privilege. Judge Metzner excluded detailed inquiry into the work done.
Although it would be inappropriate for us to speculate regarding those
questions which might properly be asked in this area, we note that some
restriction may be necessary to protect the privilege and that none of
the possible responses called for by Question 18 as now limited would
reveal anything which could be regarded as a communication within the
meaning of the privilege doctrine. Nor do we find anything in Question
80 which calls for the revelation of any communication by the Matters.

2\. The remaining questions, which pertain to documents and files, can
be subdivided into two categories. The colloquy relating to Questions
22, 73, 74 and 75 reflects Colton’s total refusal, on grounds of the
attorney-client privilege, to produce “retained copies of income tax
returns, workpapers, correspondence, memoranda and all other data
pertaining to the preparation and filing of the returns in question” and
the fact that before and after the first hearing before the Service the
firm had returned some of these papers to the Matters. The remaining
questions inquire into the general nature of the papers presently or
formerly in the firm's possession.

Judge Metzner ordered Colton to answer this last group of questions
concerning the nature of the papers, and held that the privilege did not
justify a blanket refusal to produce those documents and files still in
the firm’s possession. He did not require Colton to make any efforts to
recapture any papers no longer in the firm's possession, and the
government makes no contention here that he should have. The judge
apparently also held, and in any event the government now concedes, that
the privilege is still available to Colton to the extent of permitting
him to withhold any particular confidential papers which were
“specifically prepared by the client for the purpose of consultation
with his attorney” and any of the firm’s memoranda and worksheets “to
the extent of any unpublished expression made by an attorney therein of
confidences which had passed between him and his clients.”

It is self-evident that individual documents and files may still be
withheld insofar as they thus are or report confidential communications
between Colton and his clients, the Matters. Documentary evidence of
confidential communications is necessarily privileged as much as
testimonial evidence. Moreover, if a proper showing is made, Colton will
be able to raise the Matters’ privilege against self-incrimination as a
basis for refusing to produce any independently pre-existing records or
other documents turned over to the firm by the Matters if the Matters
could have refused to produce them under that privilege.

Clearly Colton’s blanket refusal on the grounds of the attorney-client
privilege to produce anything was unjustified. As we have noted, the
attorney-client privilege protects only those papers prepared by the
client for the purpose of confidential communication to the attorney or
by the attorney to record confidential communications, and Colton has
not made the necessary showing that the papers he refused to produce are
of such nature.

Insofar as the papers include pre-existing documents and financial
records not prepared by the Matters for the purpose of communicating
with their lawyers in confidence, their contents have acquired no
special protection from the simple fact of being turned over to an
attorney. It is only if the client could have refused to produce such
papers that the attorney may do so when they have passed into his
possession. Any other rule would permit a person to prevent disclosure
of any of his papers by the simple expedient of keeping them in the
possession of his attorney.

Appellant admits in his brief that statements, correspondence, and
documents received from third parties are not protected by the
attorney-client privilege, and the principle is obvious. He argues,
however, that in any event such papers are wholly unavailable to the
government under the “work product” rule which the Supreme Court in
*Hickman v. Taylor* held justified an attorney’s refusal to permit
discovery in a civil case of statements obtained by him from prospective
witnesses. We need not reach the government’s contention that the
work-product rule is inapplicable to such administrative investigations
as that conducted by the Internal Revenue Service here, because Colton
has made no suggestion that any of the papers involved were collected or
prepared in anticipation of litigation, as must be shown to justify
invocation of this rule.

Because Colton was unjustified in his blanket refusal to produce all of
his firm's papers concerning the Matters, it was, of course, appropriate
for agent Kurtzuk to question him at the hearing concerning the nature
of the papers in order to determine which of them were and which were
not privileged. All of the remaining questions are relevant to the
government’s proper attempt to uncover papers not protected under the
attorney-client privilege. Questions 23, 25 and 76 have the identical
purpose of trying to find out whether the firm’s files contain documents
received from or correspondence with third parties. We have already
noted that papers received from third parties are unprivileged and no
theory has been presented on which communications from an attorney to a
third party are privileged. Question 65 inquires whether the firm’s
“papers contained retained copies of Herbert and Mercedes Matter’s
income tax returns” for the relevant years. Such copies would be
unprivileged as not confidential because by definition they contain no
information that was not intended to be given to the Internal Revenue
Service. None of these questions call for any information which could
possibly reveal protected communications. Thus these questions must be
answered and the materials they refer to must be produced.

**Questions:**

1.  Why did the court find information relating to the date and general
    > nature of the legal services provided by Colton to the Matters was
    > not privileged? Do you agree?

2.  Why did the court find that the identity of a client is not
    > privileged? Do you agree?

3.  Why did the court find that pre-existing documents provided to
    > Colton were not privileged? Could the government draw
    > incriminating inferences from the fact the Matters provided those
    > documents to Colton? Should that matter for the purpose of the
    > attorney-client privilege?

**Confidentiality & Privilege**

# [**<u>X Corp. v. Doe, 805 F. Supp. 1298 (E.D. Va. 1992)</u>**](https://scholar.google.com/scholar_case?case=5227907493920946978)

ELLIS, District Judge.

Few problems are as vexing as determining what evidence justifies a
lawyer's disclosure of a client’s confidential information and
documents, which the lawyer believes reflect an ongoing or future crime
or fraud. This case presents precisely this problem. Plaintiff, X Corp.
brings this suit, in part, to prevent defendant, John Doe, X Corp.’s
former in-house counsel, from disclosing X Corp.’s confidential
information and documents retained by Doe following his discharge from X
Corp. X Corp. also seeks return of the documents. In support of the
relief sought, X Corp. cites the attorney-client privilege, the parties’
confidentiality agreement, and the lawyer’s general duty to preserve a
client’s confidences. For his part, Doe claims that the documents in
issue disclose ongoing civil and criminal frauds perpetrated by X Corp.
against the federal government. As such, according to Doe, the documents
fall within the public policy crime-fraud exception to the
attorney-client privilege and to any general or contractual duty of
confidentiality.

The matter is before the Court on X Corp.’s motion for a preliminary
injunction. For the reasons stated here, the motion is granted in part
and denied in part.

Facts

X Corp. hired Doe in March 1989 as a member of its in-house legal staff
based in Northern California. Formerly an Associate Deputy Attorney
General of the United States and Chief of Staff to the Attorney General,
Doe was a member of the bar of the state of Pennsylvania. When he was
hired, Doe executed an “Employment, Invention and Confidential
Information Agreement,” in which he expressly agreed (i) to return to X
Corp. all records obtained during, or in connection with, his employment
and (ii) to preserve X Corp.’s confidential information. Thereafter, in
the course of his employment, Doe regularly received confidential
information from X Corp. management and its employees in order to
provide legal opinions and advice. During approximately two years with X
Corp., Doe apparently excelled; his professional performance was
regarded as excellent. Eventually he was promoted to Group Counsel with
primary responsibility worldwide for X Corp.’s compliance with numerous
government regulations and antitrust laws.

In November 1990, Doe was transferred from X Corp.’s California office
to Virginia as X Corp.'s only United States-based lawyer outside
California. The parties sharply dispute the reason for the transfer. In
X Corp.’s view, the transfer occurred because Doe failed the California
bar examination. Doe, on the other hand, asserts that he initiated the
transfer to escape California’s high cost of living and because he and
his wife wanted to live closer to their relatives in Virginia. Doe also
contends that X Corp. negotiated with him to retain his services because
he was “an important contributor and asset” and because X Corp. wanted
to locate a regulatory and antitrust attorney near Washington, D.C.

X Corp. terminated Doe’s employment effective February 28, 1992,
providing him with thirty-one weeks severance pay. The reason for Doe’s
discharge is as hotly disputed as the reason for the transfer. X Corp.
claims Doe was laid-off as part of a company-wide reduction in force
involving over 700 employees. Doe counters, however, that he was
unlawfully fired in retaliation for actions X Corp. believed he was
taking in furtherance of a possible *qui tam* suit. On leaving X Corp.’s
employ, Doe took with him copies of certain documents and files, leaving
the originals with X Corp. Doe claims these documents reveal that X
Corp. is defrauding the federal government, in violation of the False
Claims Act.

X Corp.’s complaint asserts breach of the Confidentiality Agreement. X
Corp. claims that filing this action was necessary to prevent disclosure
of X Corp.’s confidential information in the event Doe filed his draft
complaint on the public record. That circumstance never materialized.

Following oral argument, the Court took the matter under advisement.
Doe, by counsel, agreed to refrain from further disclosures of X Corp.’s
claimed confidential information until the Court's ruling.

Analysis

Without doubt, this litigation presents “grave or serious questions,”
questions involving difficult and troubling ethical issues arising in
the context of attorney-client confidentiality. Few questions are graver
or more serious in the practice of law than determining what evidence of
crime or fraud justifies a lawyer’s disclosure of his client’s
confidential information. Moreover, allegations of attorney misconduct,
or even potential misconduct, engender significant and serious questions
of professional conduct critical to the client, to the accused attorney,
and to the bar as a whole. Such allegations, regardless of their
veracity, erode the already fragile public confidence in the legal
profession and in the administration of justice. And it is undeniable
that our legal system cannot function effectively unless the public has
confidence in the integrity and competence of the system and its
participants. Thus, it is paramount that lawyers understand and abide by
settled and accepted norms of professional conduct. But even settled and
accepted norms frequently provide inadequate or ambiguous guidance in
the face of specific factual circumstances. So it is here.

This litigation focuses on two professional standards of attorney
confidentiality — (i) the evidentiary attorney-client privilege and (ii)
the broader ethical duty of confidentiality — and their application to
the specific facts presented. Understanding the distinction between
these two standards is essential to the matter at bar. For that reason,
it is worth describing them here in some detail.

The first of these standards, the evidentiary attorney-client privilege,
is quite familiar, and the principles associated with it are
well-settled. This evidentiary privilege applies to disclosures of
certain types of confidences communicated between client and attorney
during the course of the attorney's representation of the client. To
prevent such disclosures, the client, through counsel or otherwise, may
invoke the privilege. The purpose of the attorney-client privilege is to
encourage full and frank communication between attorneys and their
clients and thereby promote broader public interests in the observance
of law and administration of justice. The privilege recognizes that
sound legal advice or advocacy serves public ends and that such advice
or advocacy depends upon the lawyer's being fully informed by the
client.

Nevertheless, because it “impedes the full and free discovery of the
truth,” and is “in derogation of the public’s ‘right to every man's
evidence,’” the attorney-client privilege is not “favored” by federal
courts. Accordingly, the privilege is narrowly construed to apply only
to those situations in which the party invoking the privilege consulted
an attorney for the purpose of securing a legal opinion or services and
in connection with that consultation communicated information intended
to be kept confidential.

The evidentiary attorney-client privilege, while more familiar, is not
the lawyer’s only duty of confidentiality to a client. Too often
unrecognized is the broader ethical duty of an attorney to preserve a
client’s confidences and secrets that may fall outside the
attorney-client privilege. The leading case discussing this ethical duty
is the Fifth Circuit's decision in *Brennan’s Inc. v. Brennan’s
Restaurants, Inc.* There, defendants took the position that the
attorney-client privilege barred an attorney from further representation
of a former joint client. The Fifth Circuit disagreed, noting that “the
fundamental flaw in defendants’ position is a confusion of the
attorney-client evidentiary privilege with the ethical duty to preserve
a client's confidences.” The panel held that although a former joint
client could not assert the attorney-client privilege as to matters
encompassed by the former joint representation because confidences
cannot arise between joint clients, a broader ethical duty protects
joint clients. In this regard, the court stated:

> Information acquired from a client is sheltered from use by the
> attorney against his client by virtue of the existence of the
> attorney-client relationship. This is true without regard to whether
> someone else may be privy to it. The obligation of an attorney not to
> misuse information acquired in the course of representation serves to
> vindicate the trust and reliance that client's place in their
> attorneys. A client would feel wronged if an opponent prevailed
> against him with the aid of an attorney who formerly represented the
> client in the same matter. This would undermine public confidence in
> the legal system as a means for adjudicating disputes.

As the Fifth Circuit sensibly recognized in *Brennan’s,* attorney
confidentiality is essential to sustaining public confidence in the
legal profession and the legal system. Clients therefore have a right to
enforce that confidentiality, absent specific circumstances abrogating
that right. Of course, an attorney’s duty to his client is limited by
his duty to comply with the law and the standards of professional
conduct.

Consistent with most jurisdictions, Virginia recognizes a broad duty of
confidentiality in Canon 4 of the Virginia Code of Professional
Responsibility, which states: “A Lawyer Should Preserve the Confidences
and Secrets of a Client.” The corresponding Disciplinary Rules provide
in relevant part:

> DR4-101. *Preservation of Confidences and Secrets of a Client.* — (A)
> “Confidence” refers to information protected by the attorney-client
> privilege under applicable law, and “secret” refers to other
> information gained in the professional relationship that the client
> has requested be held inviolate or the disclosure of which would be
> embarrassing or would be likely to be detrimental to the client.
>
> \(B\) Except as provided by DR 4-101(C) and (D), a lawyer shall not
> knowingly:
>
> \(1\) Reveal a confidence or secret of his client.
>
> \(2\) Use a confidence or secret of his client to the disadvantage of
> the client.
>
> \(3\) Use a confidence or secret of his client for the advantage of
> himself or a third person, unless the client consents after full
> disclosure.

Thus, mandatory Disciplinary Rule 4-101 defines two categories of
protected information: (i) a narrow category of “confidences,”
comprising information protected by the attorney-client privilege, and
(ii) a broader category of “secrets,” encompassing “other information
gained in the professional relationship that the client has requested be
held inviolate or the disclosure of which would be embarrassing or would
be likely to be detrimental to the client.” In distinguishing between
these two categories, Virginia has manifest its intention to protect
from disclosure a range of communications broader than that protected by
the attorney-client privilege. Confidentiality of both categories of
information must be maintained. Yet the duty of confidentiality imposed
by the Virginia Code of Professional Responsibility is not absolute. A
lawyer *may* reveal confidences and secrets in specific circumstances.

Yet despite its similar purpose, the DR 4-101(C)(3) "clearly
establishes” standard imposes a heavier burden on the party seeking
disclosure than the *prima facie* standard of the crime-fraud exception
to the attorney-client privilege. In other words, matters subject to the
attorney-client privilege seem to be less stringently protected from
disclosure than matters subject to the ethical privilege. This, at first
blush, seems puzzling, indeed paradoxical, for one would think that the
attorney-client privilege deserves the greater protection. On
reflection, however, the two different standards make sense given that
they apply in different contexts. Succinctly put, the evidentiary
attorney-client privilege arises only where disclosures are sought to be
compelled in some litigation context, whereas the broader ethical duty
arises in the context of voluntary or uncompelled disclosures, typically
outside a litigation context. More particularly, the attorney-client
privilege is an evidentiary privilege applicable where someone seeks to
compel an attorney or his client to reveal communications between lawyer
and client made for the purpose of securing a legal opinion or legal
services and intended to be kept confidential. Thus, the privilege
arises in the context of litigation and is therefore subject to
discipline of the adversary process and the safeguard of judicial
scrutiny, if the affected client invokes the privilege and the opposing
party seeks to overcome it. Significantly, however, the evidentiary
attorney-client privilege does not control where disclosures occur, or
potential disclosures are contemplated, in circumstances involving
uncompelled disclosure and no judicial scrutiny. In such circumstances,
the ethical duty — with its appropriately higher standard of protection
against unwarranted disclosure of suspected fraudulent activities —
governs.

Given this, in proving its claim that Doe is obligated to maintain its
confidences pursuant to the ethical duty, X Corp. bears the initial
burden of establishing that the duty exists and that the disputed
communications are subject to it. To do so, X Corp. must show, *inter
alia,* that the communications sought to be protected are “confidences”
or “secrets” within the meaning of Virginia Code of Professional
Responsibility DR4-101(A). If X Corp. carries this burden and
establishes that Doe is ethically bound not to disclose this material,
the burden then shifts to Doe.

Conclusion

In sum, the Court concludes that plaintiff’s motion for preliminary
injunction should be granted in part and denied in part. Specifically,
an appropriately tailored preliminary injunction will issue with respect
to disclosure of X Corp.’s claimed confidential information and
documents.

**Questions:**

1.  How is the duty of confidentiality different from the
    > attorney-client privilege?

2.  Why did the court hold that the information at issue is covered by
    > the duty of confidentiality, rather than the attorney-client
    > privilege?

[1] Danny Dill & Marijohn Wilkin, *Long Black Veil* (1959).

[2] 16\. Q. Did you or any member of your firm perform any services,
other than the preparation of income tax returns for the year 1951 for
Herbert and/or Mercedes Matter?
