*It would be idle to assert that there is nothing of selfishness in the
pursuit of a profession. But its ideal is not one of individual success
in competitive acquisitive activity. And because ideals operate
powerfully to shape action, professional activity, even at its worst, is
restrained and guided by something better than the desire for money
rewards.*[1]

*The function of the lawyer is to preserve a sceptical relativism in a
society hell-bent for absolutes. The worse the society, the more law
there will be. In Hell there will be nothing but law and due process
will be meticulously observed.*[2]

*About half the practice of a decent lawyer consists of telling would-be
clients that they are damned fools and should stop.*[3]

*We will not at present inquire whether the doctrine which is held on
this subject by English lawyers be or be not agreeable to reason and
morality; whether it be right that a man should, with a wig on his head,
and a band round his neck, do for a guinea what, without those
appendages, he would think it wicked and infamous to do for an empire;
whether it be right that, not merely believing but knowing a statement
to be true, he should do all that can be done by sophistry, by rhetoric,
by solemn asseveration, by indignant exclamation, by gesture, by play of
features, by terrifying one honest witness, by perplexing another, to
cause a jury to think that statement false.*[4]

*Justice says ye? I tell ye Hogan’s r-right whin he says: ‘Justice is
blind.’ Blind she is, an’ deef an’ dumb an’ has a wooden leg! Niver
again will they dhraw me to a coort. I’ll take th’ rude justice iv a
piece iv lead pipe without costs or th’ r-right iv appeal.*[5]

*Lawyer — One who protects us against robbers by taking away the
temptation.*[6]

*LAWYER, n. One skilled in circumvention of the law.*[7]

*The sad thing about lawyers is not that so many of them are stupid, but
that so many of them are intelligent. The craft is a great devourer of
good men; it sucks in and wastes almost as many as the monastic life
consumed in the Middle Ages. There is something about it that is
extraordinarily attractive to bright youngsters, especially in the
United States. It not only offers the chance of very substantial rewards
in money; it also holds out the temptation of a sort of public dignity,
with political preferment thrown in for good measure.*[8]

[1] [Roscoe Pound,</u> <u>*What is a Profession - the Rise of the
Legal Profession in Antiquity*, 19 Notre Dame L. Rev. 203
(1944)](https://scholarship.law.nd.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3933&context=ndlr).

[2] Grant Gilmore, *The Ages of American Law* 110 (1977).

[3] Philip C. Jessup, 1 *Elihu Root* 133 (1964).

[4] [Thomas Babington Macaulay,</u> *<u>Essay on Francis Bacon</u>*
<u>(1874)](https://books.google.com/books?id=eLs-AAAAYAAJ&pg=PA376&lpg=PA376#v=onepage&q&f=false).

[5] [Finley Peter Dunne,</u> *<u>Mr. Dooley’s Opinions</u>* <u>118
(1901)](https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=coo1.ark:/13960/t9280x26m;view=1up;seq=128).

[6] H.L. Mencken, *A Mencken Chrestomathy* (1949).

[7] Ambrose Bierce, *The Cynic's Dictionary* (1906).

[8] H.L. Mencken, *Stewards of Nonsense*, American Mercury 35 (Jan.
1928).
