# Organizations as Clients

We live as we dream, alone. To crack the shell we mix with the others.
36 You pull down the future with the one you love (I see no evil) 37

When an attorney represents an organization, the attorney's client is
typically the organization, and only the organization. An attorney may
represent any kind of organization, irrespective of its form. Obviously,
an attorney may represent an organization that is a legal entity, like a
corporation or a limited liability company. But an attorney may also
represent an organization that is not a legal entity, like a partnership
or an unincorporated association. In all of these cases, the attorney
may represent the organization without representing the constituents of
the organization.

But an organization is a legal fiction that can act only through its
agents. Accordingly, the attorney advises the organization by advising
its agents, who make decisions on behalf of the organization, depending
on their role in the organization. In other words, attorneys advise
organizational clients by advising non-client agents, who make decisions
that bind the organizational client.

Of course, the agents of an organizational client may consult with each
other before making decisions for the organization. They may
individually ask the attorney for advice about how to act on behalf of
the organizational client. They may ask the attorney to advise them
collectively about the organizational client's options. And they may ask
the attorney for advice about the statements, decisions, and actions of
other agents.

The attorney must provide legal advice to the agents of an
organizational client, in their capacity as agents of that client. But
the attorney must always remember that the client is the organization,
not the organization's agent. When the attorney advises an agent, the
attorney must provide advice for the benefit of the organization, not
the agent. And the attorney must ensure that the agents observe their
duties to the organization.

Specifically, an attorney representing an organizational client must
ensure that its agents act consistently with the interests of the
organization, rather than their own interests. If an agent of an
organizational client acts or refuses to act in a way that violates a
legal obligation to the organization, then the attorney must act to
protect the interests of the organization. The attorney should generally
report the concern to the management of the organization. In some cases,
the attorney may even report confidential information or withdraw from
representation, if it is necessary to protect the interests of the
organization.

Model Rule 1.13: Organization as Client

a. A lawyer employed or retained by an organization represents the
organization acting through its duly authorized constituents.

b. If a lawyer for an organization knows that an officer, employee or
other person associated with the organization is engaged in action,
intends to act or refuses to act in a

36 Gang of Four, We Live as We Dream, Alone, Songs of the Free (1984).

37 Television, See No Evil, Marquee Moon (1977).

matter related to the representation that is a violation of a legal
obligation to the organization, or a violation of law that reasonably
might be imputed to the organization, and that is likely to result in
substantial injury to the organization, then the lawyer shall proceed as
is reasonably necessary in the best interest of the organization. Unless
the lawyer reasonably believes that it is not necessary in the best
interest of the organization to do so, the lawyer shall refer the matter
to higher authority in the organization, including, if warranted by the
circumstances to the highest authority that can act on behalf of the
organization as determined by applicable law.

c. Except as provided in paragraph (d), if

1. despite the lawyer's efforts in accordance with paragraph (b) the
highest authority that can act on behalf of the organization insists
upon or fails to address in a timely and appropriate manner an action,
or a refusal to act, that is clearly a violation of law, and

1. the lawyer reasonably believes that the violation is reasonably
certain to result in substantial injury to the organization, then the
lawyer may reveal information relating to the representation whether or
not Rule 1.6 permits such disclosure, but only if and to the extent the
lawyer reasonably believes necessary to prevent substantial injury to
the organization.

d. Paragraph (c) shall not apply with respect to information relating
to a lawyer's representation of an organization to investigate an
alleged violation of law, or to defend the organization or an officer,
employee or other constituent associated with the organization against a
claim arising out of an alleged violation of law.

e. A lawyer who reasonably believes that he or she has been discharged
because of the lawyer's actions taken pursuant to paragraphs (b) or
(c), or who withdraws under circumstances that require or permit the
lawyer to take action under either of those paragraphs, shall proceed as
the lawyer reasonably believes necessary to assure that the
organization's highest authority is informed of the lawyer's discharge
or withdrawal.

f. In dealing with an organization's directors, officers, employees,
members, shareholders or other constituents, a lawyer shall explain the
identity of the client when the lawyer knows or reasonably should know
that the organization's interests are adverse to those of the
constituents with whom the lawyer is dealing.

g. A lawyer representing an organization may also represent any of its
directors, officers, employees, members, shareholders or other
constituents, subject to the provisions of Rule 1.7. If the
organization's consent to the dual representation is required by Rule
1.7, the consent shall be given by an appropriate official of the
organization other than the individual who is to be represented, or by
the shareholders.

  Representing an Organization as Client"


# Restatement (Third) of the Law Governing Lawyers ยง 96: Representing an Organization as Client

1. When a lawyer is employed or retained to represent an organization:

a. the lawyer represents the interests of the organization as defined
by its responsible agents acting pursuant to the organization's
decision-making procedures; and

b. subject to Subsection (2), the lawyer must follow instructions in
the representation.

1. If a lawyer representing an organization knows of circumstances
indicating that a constituent of the organization has engaged in action
or intends to act in a way that violates a legal obligation to the
organization that will likely cause substantial injury to it, or that
reasonably can be foreseen to be imputable to the organization and
likely to result in substantial injury to it, the lawyer must proceed in
what the lawyer reasonably believes to be the best interests of the
organization.

1. In the circumstances described in Subsection (2), the lawyer may, in
circumstances warranting such steps, ask the constituent to reconsider
the matter, recommend that a second legal opinion be sought, and seek
review by appropriate supervisory authority within the organization,
including referring the matter to the highest authority that can act in
behalf of the organization.



# In the Matter of Silva, 636 A.2d 316 (R.l. 1994)

Summary: Attorney Daniel Silva represented both Medcon Mortgage
Corporation and Suncoast Savings and Loan. Medcon was owned by Silva's
friend Edward Medeiros. Silva learned that Medeiros was illegally
diverting funds and advised him to stop, but did not advise Suncoast,
because Medeiros claimed attorney-client privilege. The Disciplinary
Board found that Silva violated the rules of professional conduct, and
the Supreme Court agreed, holding that Silva should have reported
Medeiros's fraud and withdrawn from representing Medcon and Suncoast.

PER CURIAM.

The respondent, Daniel J. Silva, appeared before this court on December
2, 1993, pursuant to an order to show cause why discipline should not be
imposed. The Disciplinary Board conducted an evidentiary hearing and
received legal memoranda from the respondent and disciplinary counsel.
The board has filed with us its decision and a concurring opinion signed
by three members of the board.

The board found that Silva violated several provisions of the Rules of
Professional Conduct when he failed to report a diversion of mortgage
funds by his long-time friend Edward Medeiros. Silva served as counsel
to Medeiros's mortgage company, Medcon Mortgage Corporation, and
Suncoast Savings and Loan of Hollywood, Florida. In his capacity as
closing attorney for Suncoast, Silva received wire transfers of mortgage
proceeds in his client account. Upon receipt of the wire transfers from
Suncoast, Silva simply turned the proceeds over to Medeiros and/or
MEDCON for disbursement. In the fall of 1990 Silva learned that Medeiros
had diverted funds from a closing funded by Suncoast in which Silva
acted as closing attorney. The diverted funds were designated to pay off
a preexisting mortgage on the property. Silva advised Medeiros that his
conduct was criminal. Silva did not notify Suncoast of the diversion of
funds, nor did he inform the title insurance company, which had issued a
title policy that did not except the prior mortgage from coverage, that
the prior mortgage had not been discharged. Silva testified that

Medeiros forbade him to do so on the basis of Medeiros's assertion of
the attorney/client privilege on behalf of both MEDCON and himself
personally.

In December 1990 Silva received a wire transfer from Suncoast for
another closing with MEDCON. Notwithstanding his knowledge of the
previous diversion of funds by Medeiros, Silva did not disburse the
funds in accordance with the terms listed on the closing sheet; instead,
he turned the proceeds over to MEDCON. Silva kept $100 of the proceeds
as his fee for serving as a conduit of the funds. Medeiros converted
those funds to his own use, and was subsequently convicted and
imprisoned. The respondent was never charged with committing a criminal
act.

The respondent's position before the board and this court is that he was
prohibited from disclosing Medeiros's defalcation by the provisions of
Rule 1.6 of the Rules of Professional Conduct. Respondent also took the
position that he had no obligation to protect Suncoast's interests. We
do not agree with either of his contentions.

On the basis of the record before us, we believe that Silva had an
obligation to both MEDCON and Suncoast to ensure that the transactions
in which he acted as attorney and/or agent were carried out with fair
dealing and good faith. We further believe that Silva had an obligation
to report Medeiros's overt act of diverting the funds as soon as he
learned of it. In addition Silva should have withdrawn from representing
both MEDCON and Suncoast as soon as he discovered Medeiros's fraud.

Although we consider Silva's failure to act appropriately and to make
the requisite disclosures serious breaches of his ethical obligation, we
find no evidence that Silva's actions were motivated by personal gain.
Rather, he appears to have had a genuine belief that Medeiros's
assertion of the attorney/client privilege and the requirements of Rule
1.6 prohibited the disclosure we now say was required.

Silva did not appear to appreciate and understand to whom he owed the
duty of confidentiality.

It is apparent from this record, however, that he was counsel to the
corporate entity MEDCON, and therefore, it was to MEDCON he owed the
duty of confidentiality. Silva's dealings with Medeiros did not
establish the attorney/client relationship that would trigger the
application of the prohibitions against disclosure encompassed in Rule
1.6. Therefore, Silva's obligations to both Suncoast and MEDCON required
him to disclose Medeiros's overt criminal act of conversion of the
funds.

This court concurs with the findings of the disciplinary board that
Silva exercised very poor judgment and that he engaged in serious
misconduct. We are constrained however to depart from the board's
recommendation for sanction. We believe that Rule 1.6 has created a
great deal of confusion among the members of the Rhode Island Bar. We
therefore censure Silva for his failure to fulfill his ethical
obligations to the parties to these transactions. The court's issuance
of this sanction rather than the three-month suspension of Silva's
license is due in part to the absence of any motive for personal gain
and Silva's ten years at the bar without a disciplinary complaint. The
court's position on the appropriate level of sanction, however, would

be more severe were it not for the apparent confusion in the mind of
this attorney concerning whom he represented and the silence of Rule 1.6
on that question.


# Questions:

1. Medeiros owned Medcon. How could Silva have reported to Medcon?

1. Could Silva have reasonably believed that he represented Medeiros?

1. Did the court impose an appropriate punishment?



# Representing a Corporation

Brennan v. Ruffner, 640 So. 2d 143 (Fla. 1994)

Summary: In 1976, Dr. Brennan and Dr. Martell formed a professional
association. Attorney Charles Ruffner prepared the shareholders
agreement. When Dr. Mirmelli joined the association in 1982, Ruffner
revised the agreement, which provided for the involuntary termination of
any shareholder by majority vote. All of the shareholders agreed. In
1989, Martell and Mirmelli voted to terminate Brennan. Among other
things, Brennan filed a malpractice action against Ruffner. The trial
court granted summary judgment to Ruffner, and the appellate court
affirmed, holding that Ruffner represented the corporation, not Brennan.

PARIENTE, Judge.

We affirm a final summary judgment entered in favor of a lawyer and
against a disgruntled minority shareholder of a closely held
corporation. We find that an attorney/client relationship did not exist
between the individual shareholder and the attorney representing the
corporation. Consequently, there is no basis for a legal malpractice
action. We further reject the other theories of liability asserted by
appellant.

In 1976, appellant, Robert J. Brennan, M.D., along with a Dr. Martell,
employed appellee, Charles L. Ruffner, Esq., to incorporate their
medical practice as a professional association. In connection with the
incorporation, the lawyer prepared a shareholder's agreement. In 1982, a
third doctor, Dr. Mirmelli, joined the corporation, and each doctor
became a one-third shareholder in the new firm. The lawyer, who was
corporate counsel since 1976, was requested to draft a new
shareholder's agreement. After approximately 8 months of negotiation,
the shareholders executed a new shareholder's agreement. The new
agreement included a provision for the involuntary termination of any
shareholder by a majority vote of the two other shareholders. It is
undisputed that Dr. Brennan was aware of this provision at the time he
signed the documents and that he signed the agreement upon reassurances
from Dr. Mirmelli that he would not join with Dr. Martell in using the
provision against Dr. Brennan.

However, despite the assurances, in 1989 Dr. Martell and Dr. Mirmelli
involuntarily terminated Dr. Brennan as a shareholder and employee of
the corporation. Dr. Brennan instituted a lawsuit

against Dr. Martell and Dr. Mirmelli claiming breach of contract and
fraud in the inducement.

The verified complaint in that lawsuit specifically alleged that Dr.
Brennan was not represented by counsel in the negotiation of the
shareholder's agreement. That lawsuit was settled. Dr. Brennan then
filed this suit for legal malpractice, breach of contract, breach of
fiduciary duty and breach of contract as a third party beneficiary. In
contradiction to the sworn allegations of the first lawsuit, Dr. Brennan
alleged in this complaint that the lawyer represented him individually,
as well as the corporation, in the preparation and drafting of the
agreement. The lawyer denied undertaking the representation of Dr.
Brennan individually.

In a legal malpractice action, a plaintiff must prove three elements:
the attorney's employment, the attorney's neglect of a reasonable duty
and that such negligence resulted in and was the proximate cause of loss
to the plaintiff. Florida courts have uniformly limited attorney's
liability for negligence in the performance of their professional duties
to clients with whom they share privity of contract.

The material undisputed facts in this case support a legal conclusion
that there was no privity of contract between Dr. Brennan and the
corporation's lawyer. It is undisputed that the lawyer was representing
the corporation. The issue raised by Dr. Brennan's complaint was
whether the lawyer was also representing him individually. While Dr.
Brennan made the initial contact with the lawyer, there is no evidence
in the record to create a credible issue of fact that the lawyer ever
represented Dr. Brennan individually. Dr. Brennan's sworn complaint
against the other doctors, which preceded the legal malpractice action
against the lawyer, states he was unrepresented by counsel in the
negotiation of the shareholder's agreement.

Dr. Brennan argues that a separate duty to him as a shareholder arose by
virtue of the lawyer's representation of the closely held corporation.
Although never squarely decided in this state, we hold that where an
attorney represents a closely held corporation, the attorney is not in
privity with and therefore owes no separate duty of diligence and care
to an individual shareholder absent special circumstances or an
agreement to also represent the shareholder individually. While there is
no specific ethical prohibition in Florida against dual representation
of the corporation and the shareholder if the attorney is convinced that
a conflict does not exist, an attorney representing a corporation does
not become the attorney for the individual stockholders merely because
the attorney's actions on behalf of the corporation may also benefit
the stockholders. The duty of an attorney for the corporation is first
and foremost to the corporation, even though legal advice rendered to
the corporation may affect the shareholders. Cases in other
jurisdictions have similarly held.

We reject the notion that the lawyer in this case could be held liable
to one of the minority shareholders for a breach of fiduciary duty. In
any closely held corporation, there will be an inherent conflict between
the potential rights of the minority shareholder and the rights of the
corporation in a shareholder's agreement concerning termination. At the
time this agreement was drafted, any one of the three shareholders could
have ended up becoming the minority shareholder. While Dr. Brennan
claimed in the complaint that the lawyer had a duty to advise him of a
conflict of interest and never advised him of a potential conflict, the
facts in the record

do not support that contention. Dr. Brennan testified in deposition that
he simply did not recall any conversations. However, the accountant for
the corporation specifically remembered a conversation where the lawyer
told the doctors collectively that he represented only the corporation
in the drafting of the shareholder agreement. Absent some evidence that
the corporation's lawyer conspired or acted with the two shareholders
to insert provisions that would work to the detriment of the third
shareholder; that the corporation's lawyer concealed his representation
of another individual shareholder; or that the attorney agreed to the
dual representation, there is no breach of fiduciary duty established in
this case.

Finally, even assuming arguendo that a duty existed based on an
attorney/client relationship, a third party beneficiary theory or a
breach of fiduciary relationship, we simply do not find any factual
dispute concerning the issue of proximate cause. It is undisputed that
Dr. Brennan was aware of the provisions in the agreement and chose to
take his chances upon being reassured by Dr. Mirmelli that he would
never use the provisions against Dr. Brennan.


# Questions:

1. Why did the court hold that Ruffner represented the corporation,
rather than Brennan? What if Brennan were a majority shareholder of the
corporation?

1. Did Ruffner provide Brennan with legal advice? If so, did Ruffner
provide negligent legal advice?

1. Did Ruffner represent any of the doctors?

1. Did Ruffner represent anyone?



# Representing a Partnership

Mursau Corp. v. Florida Penn Oil & Gas, Inc., 638 F. Supp. 259 (W.D. Pa.
1986)

Summary: Thomas Murray owned Mursau Corporation, which purchased a
limited partnership in Florida-Penn Oil and Gas, Inc., in a deal managed
by Goldberg & Snodgrass. Mursau filed a breach of fiduciary duty action
against G&S, but the district court granted summary judgment to G&S,
because it found no attorney-client relationship or evidence of fraud.

COHILL, Chief Judge.

Presently before us are Motions for Summary Judgment filed on behalf of
each Defendant. Having held oral argument and having reviewed the
affidavits, depositions, briefs and other exhibits filed, we find no
genuine issue as to any material fact. Consequently, we will grant these
motions.

Facts

Plaintiff, Mursau Corporation, through its President and majority
stockholder, Thomas H.

Murray, Esquire, purchased a limited partnership interest in Defendant
Florida-Penn Oil & Gas, Inc.'s 1981-102 Drilling Program. Defendant
Christian E. Carlsen is the President of Fla-Penn and Defendant David
Graham is a stockholder of Fla-Penn. Defendant Goldberg & Snodgrass, a
law firm in which individual Defendants Lee H. Goldberg and Stewart R.
Snodgrass are partners, was retained by Fla-Penn to structure the 102
program and prepare a tax opinion letter with regard to that program.

Mursau's acquisition of the limited partnership interest in the 102
program came about as a result of Murray contacting Goldberg in early
October, 1981. Murray was interested in the 102 program as a tax shelter
for Mursau. Since Mursau's fiscal year ended on October 31, Murray
wanted to close the deal on or before October 30, in order to secure tax
advantages for Mursau in 1981.

At his initial meeting with G&S, Murray was given a copy of a Private
Placement Memorandum for an earlier Fla-Penn oil and gas partnership,
the 101 program. He was told that the PPM for the 102 program would be
materially similar but that the costs would be reduced proportionally
according to the lesser number of wells to be drilled under the 102
program. The 101 program drilled 10 wells; the 102 program would drill
only 4. Murray reviewed the PPM for the 101 program with independent
counsel, then signed a commitment letter for the 102 program.

On October 29, 1981, Murray received a copy of the PPM for the 102
program which was in fact materially similar to the PPM for the 101
program. At the closing on October 30, 1981, Murray refused to tender a
check on behalf of Mursau unless he was granted check-signing authority
for the partnership, a demand clearly in conflict with the limited
partnership agreement already signed by Murray. Murray wanted that
authority so that, after closing, he could dispute the payment of
certain costs provided for in the PPM, including a finder's commission
to the group securing the limited partners participation. As indicated
by his notes comparing the costs under the 101 and 102 program, Murray
was fully aware of the $49,600 finder's commission prior to the time
set for closing.

Although Murray initially walked out of the closing because of the
refusal of Fla-Penn to acquiesce in his demands, he returned after a
conversation with Snodgrass outside on the sidewalk. Fla-Penn never
acceded to Murray's demands. After the closing, Fla-Penn paid G&S
$20,000 for legal fees and $49,600 as a finder's commission. Murray
became aware of these payments sometime in December of 1981.

In the complaint, Murray essentially alleges breach of fiduciary duty
arising out of an attorney-client relationship between Mursau and G&S and
Goldberg and Snodgrass individually.

The Defendants maintain that the 102 PPM as well as the 101 PPM, on
which the 102 was modeled, disclose all material information. Both PPMs
disclose the payment of legal fees to G&S and the finder's commission;
both disclose the potential conflict of interest of G&S as

counsel for the partnership and the general partner. Both advise
prospective limited partners to consult independent counsel.

In order to recover for a breach of fiduciary duty by an attorney, the
plaintiff has a threshold burden of showing existence of an
attorney-client relationship. The intent to create an attorney-client
relation can be implied from the conduct of the parties where no express
relationship exists.

Although the relationship of attorney and client may be implied from the
conduct of the parties, such conduct must evidence an offer or request
by the client for legal services and an acceptance of the offer by the
attorney. It is clear that an attorney client relationship exists only
with the consent of both parties.

As noted above, G&S's representation of the partnership and general
partner was disclosed to Plaintiff, and Plaintiff was advised to obtain
independent counsel. Murray admits that he did retain legal counsel who,
on behalf of Mursau, met with G&S about the 102 plan. Murray received a
bill and remitted payment to his independent counsel for legal services.

In contrast, Plaintiff paid no fees to G&S. As stated in the 102 PPM,
the partnership paid G&S for adapting the 101 PPM for use in the 102
plan and for preparing the tax opinion letter to accompany the 102 PPM.
The legal fees paid to G&S by the partnership did not include any amount
for services rendered to the Plaintiff. Plaintiff concedes that the only
legal advice he received from G&S concerned the tax aspects of the 102
plan. We conclude that the legal advice on the tax consequences of the
102 plan was a service provided to and paid for by the partnership as
part of its efforts to secure a limited partner for its venture.

Since we see no evidence from which we can imply an offer or request for
services by Plaintiff, nor an acceptance of any such request by G&S, we
must conclude that no attorney-client relationship was formed between
Mursau, the limited partnership, and G&S. G&S did have an
attorney-client relationship with the partnership and probably the
general partner who organized the venture. Although Mursau indirectly
benefited by receiving the services G&S performed on behalf of the
partnership to enable the partnership to attract a limited partner, it
never requested, nor did it receive, other legal advice or services from
G&S.

Even were we to find evidence from which an attorney-client relationship
between G&S and Mursau could be inferred, as discussed above, we see no
facts indicating any fraud or other breach tending to violate such a
relationship.

Viewing the facts presented in a light most favorable to Mursau, the
nonmoving party, we believe Defendants have met their burden of showing
the absence of any genuine issue of material fact and are entitled to
summary judgment.


# Questions:

1. Did Mursau have any attorney-client relationship with G&S?

1. Did Mursau pay G&S for legal services?

1. Why did the court conclude that Mursau had no attorney-client
relationship with G&S relation to this matter?



# Organizational Agents as Clients

There's nothing wrong with having aspirations, nothing wrong with
walking tall. But if misfortune deals the consequences, sooner or later,
friend, you've got to fall. 38

In theory, an attorney who represents an organization represents only
the organization, and does not represent the organization's agents.
However, organizations can act only through their agents, and when
attorneys represent organizations, they do so by providing legal advice
to the organization's agents, who made decisions on behalf of the
organization. Attorneys must convince the organization's agents to hire
them. Attorneys must convince the organization's agents to follow their
advice. And attorneys must obey the decisions of the organization's
agents. It is easy for attorneys representing an organization to see its
agents as their clients, rather than the organization itself.

But that is a terrible mistake. When attorneys represent organizations,
they must never treat its agents as their clients. They must always
represent the interests of the organization, and only the organization.
Attorneys representing an organization must always act in the best
interest of the organization, and they must ensure that its agents also
act in the best interests of the organization. And if the interests of
the organization conflict with the interests of its agents, the attorney
must always pursue the interests of the organization.

Usually, the interests of an organization and its agents coincide, and
the agents pursue the interests of the organization to the best of their
ability. But that is not always the case. Sometimes, the interests of an
organization and its agents diverge, and the agents pursue their own
interests, at the expense of the organization.

Attorneys representing organizations must always be vigilant to ensure
that the organization's interests are aligned with the interests of its
agents, and that its agents are acting in the organization's interests,
rather than their own. For example, if an agent wants to make a
transaction on behalf of the organization that will benefit the agent at
the organization's expense, the attorney must object. Likewise, if the
agent wants to disclose confidential information about the organization
that will benefit the agent, but harm the organization, the attorney
must object.



# Agents as Quasi-Clients

Attorneys representing an organization must always be careful to ensure
that its agents do not become quasi-clients. If an attorney is retained
by an organization, then the attorney has an express attorney-client
relationship with the organization. But in order to represent an
organization, an attorney must provide legal advice to its agents, who
will act on the organization's behalf. Accordingly, the attorney must
only provide legal advice relating to the interests of the organization,
and must not provide legal advice relating to the interests of its

Husker Du, Friend, You've Got to Fall, Warehouse: Songs and Stories
(1987).

agents. In fact, attorneys representing an organization should
explicitly inform its agents that they represent the organization, and
not its agents. And they should advise the organization's agents to seek
outside counsel, if their interests may diverge from the interests of
the organization.

In theory, an attorney representing an organization who wants to
interview an agent of the organization can prevent the agent from
becoming a client by explicitly warning the agent that the attorney
represents the organization, and does not represent the agent. This
warning is often called an "Upjohn warning" or "corporate Miranda
warning," because its purpose is to inform agents of their right to
remain silent. After all, an organization cannot force its agents to
testify against themselves. But it can fire them, if they refuse to
participate in an investigation.

If an attorney representing an organization provides legal advice to an
agent of that organization, then the agent may become a quasi-client of
the attorney. That is awkward, because it can create a conflict of
interest.

  Group Model "Upjohn Warning" or "Corporate Miranda" Warning


# American Bar Association White Collar Crime Committee Working Group Model "Upjohn Warning" or "Corporate Miranda" Warning

I am a lawyer for Corporation A. I represent only Corporation A, and I
do not represent you personally.

I am conducting this interview to gather facts in order to provide legal
advice for Corporation A. This interview is part of an investigation to
determine the facts and circumstances of X in order to advise
Corporation A how best to proceed.

Your communications with me are protected by the attorney-client
privilege. But the attorney-client privilege belongs solely to
Corporation A, not you. That means Corporation A alone may elect to
waive the attorney-client privilege and reveal our discussion to third
parties. Corporation A alone may decide to waive the privilege and
disclose this discussion to such third parties as federal or state
agencies, at its sole discretion, and without notifying you.

In order for this discussion to be subject to the privilege, it must be
kept in confidence. In other words, with the exception of your own
attorney, you may not disclose the substance of this interview to any
third party, including other employees or anyone outside of the company.
You may discuss the facts of what happened but you may not discuss this
discussion.

Do you have any questions?

Are you willing to proceed?


# Questions:

1. Does this model warning adequately explain that the attorney
represents the organization and not its agents?

1. If you were an attorney representing an organization, would you have
any concerns about this warning?

1. If you received this warning, would you answer any questions? Would
you give candid answers? Would you obtain outside counsel? What if you
were unaware of the subject matter of the inquiry?

In re Grand Jury Subpoena: Under Seal, 415 F. 3d 334 (4th Cir. 2005)

Summary: AOL started an internal investigation re: its relationship with
PurchasePro. AOL retained Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering to assist in the
investigation. AOL general counsel told its employees that were
interviewed that the GC represented the company, but could represent
them if there was no conflict of interest. GC also told the employees
that they could retain personal counsel at company expense. The SEC
began to investigate AOL's relationship with PurchasePro. One employee,
Wakeford, was deposed by SEC and believed the attorneys represented both
them and the company. Others, John Doe #1, #2, that were deposed sought
independent counsel. The court denied Wakeford's motion to quash because
it found that attorney-client privilege in the subpoenaed documents
belonged only to AOL.

WILSON, District Judge.

This is an appeal by three former employees of AOL Time Warner from the
decision of the district court denying their motions to quash a grand
jury subpoena for documents related to an internal investigation by AOL.
Appellants in the district court that the subpoenaed documents were
protected by the attorney-client privilege. Because the district court
concluded that the privilege was AOL's alone and because AOL had
expressly waived its privilege, the court denied the appellants'
motion. We affirm.

I.

In March of 2001, AOL began an internal investigation into its
relationship with PurchasePro,

Inc. AOL retained the law firm of Wilmer, Cutler & Pickering to assist
in the investigation. Over the next several months, AOL's general
counsel and counsel from Wilmer Cutler interviewed appellants, AOL
employees Kent Wakeford, John Doe 1, and John Doe 2.

The investigating attorneys interviewed Wakeford, a manager in the
company's Business Affairs division, on six occasions. At their third
interview, and the first one in which Wilmer Cutler attorneys were
present, Randall Boe, AOL's General Counsel, informed Wakeford, "We
represent the company. These conversations are privileged, but the
privilege belongs to the company and the company decides whether to
waive it. If there is a conflict, the attorney-client privilege belongs
to the company." Memoranda from that meeting also indicate that the

attorneys explained to Wakeford that they represented AOL but that they
"could" represent him as well, "as long as no conflict appeared." The
attorneys interviewed Wakeford again three days later and, at the
beginning of the interview, reiterated that they represented AOL, that
the privilege belonged to AOL, and that Wakeford could retain personal
counsel at company expense.

The investigating attorneys interviewed John Doe 1 three times. Before
the first interview, Boe told him, "We represent the company. These
conversations are privileged, but the privilege belongs to the company
and the company decides whether to waive it. You are free to consult
with your own lawyer at any time." Memoranda from that interview
indicate that the attorneys also told him, "We can represent you until
such time as there appears to be a conflict of interest, but the
attorney-client privilege belongs to AOL and AOL can decide whether to
keep it or waive it." At the end of the interview, John Doe 1 asked if
he needed personal counsel. A Wilmer Cutler attorney responded that he
did not recommend it, but that he would tell the company not to be
concerned if Doe retained counsel.

AOL's attorneys interviewed John Doe 2 twice and followed essentially
the same protocol they had followed with the other appellants. They
noted, "We represent AOL, and can represent you too if there is not a
conflict." In addition, the attorneys told him that, "the
attorney-client privilege is AOL's and AOL can choose to waive it."

In November, 2001, the Securities and Exchange Commission began to
investigate AOL's relationship with PurchasePro. In December 2001, AOL
and Wakeford, through counsel, entered into an oral "common interest
agreement," which they memorialized in writing in January 2002. The
attorneys acknowledged that, "representation of their respective clients
raised issues of common interest to their respective clients and that
the sharing of certain documents, information, and communications with
clients" would be mutually beneficial. As a result, the attorneys agreed
to share access to information relating to their representation of
Wakeford and AOL, noting that "the oral or written disclosure of Common
Interest Materials would not diminish in any way the confidentiality of
such Materials and would not constitute a waiver of any applicable
privilege."

Wakeford testified before the SEC on February 14, 2002, represented by
his personal counsel. Laura Jehl, AOL's general counsel, and F. Whitten
Peters of Williams & Connolly, whom AOL had retained in November 2001 in
connection with the PurchasePro investigation, were also present, and
both stated that they represented Wakeford "for purposes of the
deposition."

During the deposition, the SEC investigators questioned Wakeford about
his discussions with AOL's attorneys. When Wakeford's attorney asserted
the attorney-client privilege, the SEC investigators followed up with
several questions to determine whether the privilege was applicable to
the investigating attorneys' March-June 2001 interviews with Wakeford.
Wakeford told them he believed, at the time of the interviews, that the
investigating attorneys represented him and the company.

John Doe 1 testified before the SEC on February 27, 2002, represented by
personal counsel.

No representatives of AOL were present. When SEC investigators
questioned Doe about the March-June 2001 internal investigation, his
counsel asserted that the information was protected and directed Doe not
to answer any questions about the internal investigation "in respect to
the company's privilege." He stated that Doe's response could be
considered a waiver of the privilege and that, "if the AOL lawyers were
present, they could make a judgment, with respect to the company's
privilege, about whether or not the answer would constitute a waiver."

On February 26, 2004, a grand jury in the Eastern District of Virginia
issued a subpoena commanding AOL to provide "written memoranda and other
written records reflecting interviews conducted by attorneys for AOL" of
the appellants between March 15 and June 30, 2001. While AOL agreed to
waive the attorney-client privilege and produce the subpoenaed
documents, counsel for the appellants moved to quash the subpoena on the
grounds that each appellant had an individual attorney-client
relationship with the investigating attorneys, that his interviews were
individually privileged, and that he had not waived the privilege.
Wakeford also claimed that the information he disclosed to the
investigating attorneys was privileged under the common interest
doctrine.

The district court denied John Doe 1's and John Doe 2's motions because
it found they failed to prove they were clients of the investigating
attorneys who interviewed them. The court based its conclusion on its
findings that: (1) the investigating attorneys told them that they
represented the company; (2) the investigating attorneys told them, "we
can represent you," which is distinct from "we do represent you"; (3)
they could not show that the investigating attorneys agreed to represent
them; and (4) the investigating attorneys told them that the
attorney-client privilege belonged to the company and the company could
choose to waive it.

The court initially granted Wakeford's motion to quash because it found
that his communications with the investigating attorneys were privileged
under the common interest agreement between counsel for Wakeford and
counsel for AOL. Following a motion for reconsideration, the court
reversed its earlier ruling and held that the subpoenaed documents
relating to Wakeford's interviews were not privileged because it found
that Wakeford's common interest agreement with AOL postdated the
March-June 2001 interviews. In addition, the court held that Wakeford
failed to prove that he was a client of the investigating attorneys at
the time the interviews took place. The court based its conclusion on
its findings that: (1) none of the investigating attorneys understood
that Wakeford was seeking personal legal advice; (2) the investigating
attorneys did not provide any personal legal advice to him; and (3) the
investigating attorneys believed they represented AOL and not Wakeford.
This appeal followed.

Appellants argue that because they believed that the investigating
attorneys who conducted the interviews were representing them
personally, their communications are privileged. However, we agree with
the district court that essential touchstones for the formation of an
attorney-client relationship between the investigating attorneys and the
appellants were missing at the time of

the interviews. There is no evidence of an objectively reasonable,
mutual understanding that the appellants were seeking legal advice from
the investigating attorneys or that the investigating attorneys were
rendering personal legal advice. Nor, in light of the investigating
attorneys' disclosure that they represented AOL and that the privilege
and the right to waive it were AOL's alone, do we find investigating
counsel's hypothetical pronouncement that they could represent
appellants sufficient to establish the reasonable understanding that
they were representing appellants. Accordingly, we find no fault with
the district court's opinion that no individual attorney-client
privilege attached to the appellants' communications with AOL's
attorneys.

"The attorney-client privilege is the oldest of the privileges for
confidential communications known to the common law." "When the
privilege applies, it affords confidential communications between lawyer
and client complete protection from disclosure." Because its application
interferes with "the truth seeking mission of the legal process,"
however, we must narrowly construe the privilege, and recognize it "only
to the very limited extent that excluding relevant evidence has a public
good transcending the normally predominant principle of utilizing all
rational means for ascertaining the truth." Accordingly, the privilege
applies only to "confidential disclosures by a client to an attorney
made in order to obtain legal assistance." The burden is on the
proponent of the attorney-client privilege to demonstrate its
applicability."

The person seeking to invoke the attorney-client privilege must prove
that he is a client or that he affirmatively sought to become a client.
"The professional relationship hinges upon the client's belief that he
is consulting a lawyer in that capacity and his manifested intention to
seek professional legal advice." An individual's subjective belief that
he is represented is not alone sufficient to create an attorney-client
relationship. Rather, the putative client must show that his subjective
belief that an attorney-client relationship existed was reasonable under
the circumstances.

With these precepts in mind, we conclude that appellants could not have
reasonably believed that the investigating attorneys represented them
personally during the time frame covered by the subpoena. First, there
is no evidence that the investigating attorneys told the appellants that
they represented them, nor is there evidence that the appellants asked
the investigating attorneys to represent them. To the contrary, there is
evidence that the investigating attorneys relayed to Wakeford the
company's offer to retain personal counsel for him at the company's
expense, and that they told John Doe 1 that he was free to retain
personal counsel. Second, there is no evidence that the appellants ever
sought personal legal advice from the investigating attorneys, nor is
there any evidence that the investigating attorneys rendered personal
legal advice. Third, when the appellants spoke with the investigating
attorneys, they were fully apprised that the information they were
giving could be disclosed at the company's discretion. Under these
circumstances, appellants could not have reasonably believed that the
investigating attorneys represented them personally. Therefore, the
district court's finding that appellants had no attorney-client
relationship with the investigating attorneys is not clearly

erroneous.

The appellants argue that the phrase "we can represent you as long as no
conflict appears," manifested an agreement by the investigating
attorneys to represent them. They claim that, "it is hard to imagine a
more straightforward assurance of an attorney-client relationship than
'we can represent you.'" We disagree. As the district court noted, "we
can represent you" is distinct from "we do represent you." If there was
any evidence that the investigating attorneys had said, "we do represent
you," then the outcome of this appeal might be different. Furthermore,
the statement actually made, "we can represent you," must be interpreted
within the context of the entire warning. The investigating attorneys'
statements to the appellants, read in their entirety, demonstrate that
the attorneys' loyalty was to the company. That loyalty was never
implicitly or explicitly divided. In addition to noting at the outset
that they had been retained to represent AOL, the investigating
attorneys warned the appellants that the content of their communications
during the interview "belonged" to AOL. This protocol put the appellants
on notice that, while their communications with the attorneys were
considered confidential, the company could choose to reveal the content
of those communications at any time, without the appellants' consent.

We note, however, that our opinion should not be read as an implicit
acceptance of the watereddown "Upjohn warnings" the investigating
attorneys gave the appellants. It is a potential legal and ethical mine
field. Had the investigating attorneys, in fact, entered into an
attorney-client relationship with appellants, as their statements to the
appellants professed they could, they would not have been free to waive
the appellants' privilege when a conflict arose. It should have seemed
obvious that they could not have jettisoned one client in favor of
another. Rather, they would have had to withdraw from all representation
and to maintain all confidences. Indeed, the court would be hard pressed
to identify how investigating counsel could robustly investigate and
report to management or the board of directors of a publicly-traded
corporation with the necessary candor if counsel were constrained by
ethical obligations to individual employees. However, because we agree
with the district court that the appellants never entered into an
attorney-client relationship with the investigating attorneys, they
averted these troubling issues.


# Questions:

1. Why did the court hold that no attorney-client relationship existed?
Do you agree with its conclusion?

1. What information should an attorney representing an organization be
required to provide to the agents of that organization in order to
ensure that the agents understand that the attorney represents the
organization, and does not represent them?

1. Does it make sense for attorneys representing an organization to say
they can represent an agent of the organization unless there is a
conflict?



# United States v. Stein, 463 F. Supp. 2d 459 (S.D.N.Y. 2006)

Summary: Warley was a partner at KPMG. She was questioned in course of
IRS investigation by attorneys hired by KPMG. The firm waived its
attorney-client privilege and gave the government documents that
described attorney's communication with

Warley. Warley says the attorneys were representing her and KPMG and her
attorney-client privilege was compromised by the actions of KPMG and the
evidence should be suppressed. Evidence suggests there was no Upjohn
warning. Warley's showing of her subjective belief that the attorneys
represented her is insufficient to meet her burden of proving privilege.
Thus, the court denied Warley's motion for relief from the government's
alleged violation of her attorney-client privilege.

KAPLAN, District Judge.

Defendant Carol Warley was a partner in KPMG LLP, one of the world's
largest accounting firms. She was questioned in the course of an IRS
investigation by attorneys hired by KPMG. When that investigation gave
way to a threatened indictment of KPMG, the firm, in an effort to curry
favor with prosecutors and avoid prosecution, waived its attorney-client
privilege and gave the government documents embodying the substance of
the attorneys' communications with Ms. Warley. Warley contends that the
attorneys were representing her as well as KPMG, that her
attorney-client privilege was compromised by the actions of the
government and KPMG, and that the evidence should be suppressed. She
thus raises a troublesome question that arises whenever an employee of a
business organization consults with counsel retained by the entity about
matters involving both the employee and the entity  when does the
lawyer represent the employee as well as the entity?

This problem could be avoided if counsel in these situations routinely
made clear to employees that they represent the employer alone and that
the employee has no attorney-client privilege with respect to his or her
communications with employer-retained counsel. Indeed, the Second
Circuit advised that they do so years before the communications here in
question. But there is no evidence that the attorneys who spoke to Ms.
Warley followed that course.

Facts

Ms. Warley was a partner of KPMG at all relevant times. In 2003, the IRS
was investigating KPMG's tax shelter activities, including some in which
clients of Warley had participated. In the course of the investigation,
Warley communicated with KPMG's in-house counsel and with two law firms
retained by KPMG, Kronish Lieb Weiner & Heilman LLP and King & Spalding
LLP. Warley does not recall having been told that the attorneys
represented only KPMG or that any privilege belonged solely to the firm
and could be waived by the firm without her consent.

In September 2004, in circumstances that have been discussed elsewhere,
KPMG waived its attorney-client privilege for communications relating to
the IRS summons. It gave the government documents relating to these
communications, and the government apparently intends to use them in
prosecuting Warley and others. The government argues that KPMG's waiver
was sufficient to allow it to obtain the documents and disputes
Warley's claim of privilege.

Warley identifies two sets of allegedly privileged communications
relating to which the government has documents. First, Warley was
interviewed by attorneys from Kronish and King & Spalding on two
occasions in August 2003. The government is in possession of a
memorandum of these interviews prepared by a Kronish attorney as well as
his handwritten notes. In addition, it has listed as a trial witness one
of the Kronish attorneys present at these interviews.

The second allegedly privileged communication is an email exchange in
January and February of 2003 between Warley and Steven Gremminger, an
in-house attorney for KPMG, relating to the tax strategies under
investigation. The government has a copy of this email string.

Both parties point to the substance of the communications to support
their respective claims that privilege did or did not attach. Warley
further relies upon KPMG's 2003 partnership agreement, which provided
that "the General Counsel shall act on behalf of all Members, except
where a dispute arises between an individual Member and the Firm."
Finally, Warley alleges that counsel retained by KPMG jointly
represented KPMG and her personally in two lawsuits prior to the events
at issue here.

Discussion

A. Scope of Privilege

The question whether employee communications with counsel retained by
the employer about matters relating to the employment are privileged
vis-a-vis the employee  in other words, whether the employee has a
personal attorney-client privilege that only the employee may waive
is troublesome because competing interests are at play.

On the one hand, an employee, like any other agent, owes the employer a
duty to disclose to the employer any information pertinent to the
employment. This includes an obligation "to assist the employer's
counsel in the investigation and defense of matters pertaining to the
employer's business." Moreover, an employer has a substantial interest
in retaining freedom of action to respond to investigations and other
legal threats, an interest borne of the desire to remain in business and
of duties to other constituents of the entity. Allowing individual
employees to assert personal attorney-client privilege over
communications with the employer's counsel could frustrate an
employer's ability to act in its own self interest, perhaps to the
detriment of other employees, stockholders, or partners.

Nevertheless, there are weighty considerations on the other side of the
scale. Once a government investigation begins, the interests of
employees and of the entity may diverge. Indeed, that may be true in
other circumstances in which employees communicate with employer
counsel. Employees often are unaware of the potential personal
consequences of cooperating with lawyers hired by their employers. Even
more troublesome, they may cooperate with employer-retained counsel in
the belief that their communications are protected by a

personal privilege, sometimes as a result of a misapprehension of the
law and occasionally perhaps as a result of deception, inadvertent or
otherwise.

Courts have wrestled with this problem for some time now. In the absence
of evidence that the employee was deceived by the employer as to the
existence of a personal attorney-client relationship or as to a personal
right to control the disclosure of privileged materials, circuits have
employed different standards to determine when personal privilege
attaches. Some have looked at whether the individual reasonably believed
that there was a personal attorney-client relationship, although the
Second Circuit has rejected this approach. Others have focused on
whether the individual expressly requested personal advice or
representation. In In re Bevill, Bresler & Schulman Asset Management
Corp., the Third Circuit enunciated a five-part test that has been
adopted by at least two other circuits

First, the individual claiming personal privilege must show they
approached counsel for the purpose of seeking legal advice. Second, they
must demonstrate that when they approached counsel they made it clear
that they were seeking legal advice in their individual rather than in
their representative capacities. Third, they must demonstrate that the
counsel saw fit to communicate with them in their individual capacities,
knowing that a possible conflict could arise. Fourth, they must prove
that their conversations with counsel were confidential. And, fifth,
they must show that the substance of their conversations with counsel
did not concern matters within the company or the general affairs of the
company.

Our circuit addressed the issue in United States v. International
Brotherhood of Teamsters. The Teamsters court first noted that courts
typically have said that the attorney-client privilege for an employee's
communication with corporate counsel about corporate matters belongs to
the corporation, not the individual employee. Nevertheless, it said,
courts have found a personal privilege where the individual met "certain
requirements." It quoted the Third Circuit's Bevill test as one such
example and noted that other courts have required the employee "make it
clear to corporate counsel that he seeks legal advice on personal
matters." Drawing upon all of these sources, the Circuit concluded that
the individual before it lacked any personal privilege with respect to
the communications at issue because he "neither sought nor received
legal advice from his employer's counsel on personal matters."

Teamsters' holding thus rests on the scope of "personal matters." But
the meaning of that phrase has not been developed. Do "personal matters"
involve solely the individual, with no impact on the entity's interests
whatsoever? Or may they encompass matters that implicate both the
individual and the entity? Although the facts of Teamsters suggest that
the Circuit might have contemplated the former view, it did not
expressly address the question.

Some guidance may be gained from circuits that have addressed this issue
in the context of the fifth Bevill factor, which requires that the
communication "not concern matters within the company or the general
affairs of the company." The Tenth Circuit concluded that this factor

only precludes an officer from asserting an individual attorney client
privilege when the communication concerns the corporation's rights and
responsibilities. However, if the communication between a corporate
officer and corporate counsel specifically focuses upon the individual
officer's personal rights and liabilities, then the fifth prong of
Bevill can be satisfied even though the general subject matter of the
conversation pertains to matters within the general affairs of the
company. For example, a corporate officer's discussion with his
corporation's counsel may still be protected by a personal, individual
attorney-client privilege when the conversation specifically concerns
the officer's personal liability for jail time based on conduct
interrelated with corporate affairs.

The First Circuit adopted the Tenth Circuit's interpretation and
discussed its application where communications involving the
individual's liabilities "do not appear to be distinguishable" from
those concerning the entity's interests. Acknowledging that both the
employee and the entity could have an attorney-client relationship with
the attorney with respect to such a communication, but noting also the
fiduciary duty owed by a corporate officer to the corporation, the First
Circuit concluded that "a corporation may unilaterally waive the
attorney-client privilege with respect to any communications made by a
corporate officer in his corporate capacity, notwithstanding the
existence of an individual attorney-client relationship between him and
the corporation's counsel." Thus, under the First Circuit formulation,
individual privilege may be asserted successfully only when
"communications regarding individual acts and liabilities are segregable
from discussions about the corporation." To hold otherwise, the court
reasoned, "would open the door to a claim of jointly held privilege in
virtually every corporate communication with counsel."

The Tenth and First Circuits thus have argued persuasively that
communications implicating personal liability for acts within the scope
of an individual's employment may be protected by individual
attorney-client privilege, at least in some circumstances. It is an open
question whether such communications involve "personal matters" within
the meaning of Teamsters. But it is unnecessary to resolve that issue
here. As discussed below, and particularly in light of the fact that the
burden of proof lies with the party asserting privilege, Warley fails to
meet any standard.

B. Warley's Claims

To begin with, there is no evidence that Warley was deceived by KPMG or
its attorneys about the nature of her relationship with counsel.
Although she claims to have "understood that counsel were representing
her personally as a partner in the firm," her subjective belief alone
does not support a conclusion that KPMG's acts were responsible for that
belief. Accordingly, the analysis of her claims rests on whether the
communications involved "personal matters."

Warley's communications with counsel were about events and conduct
within the scope of her work as a partner at KPMG, thus clearly
implicating KPMG's interest in responding to the IRS investigation. The
events and conduct, however, also implicated Warley's personal interests
and liabilities, as is amply evidenced by her status as a defendant in
this case. Warley's

communications thus present the difficult circumstance where both the
individual's and the entity's interests are involved.

As discussed above, the scope of "personal matters" under Teamsters is
unclear. Under a narrow reading, the fact that the communications
implicated KPMG's interests alone would require that Warley's claim of
privilege be rejected. Even under the approach adopted by the First and
Tenth Circuits, however, Warley could not prevail on a privilege claim
absent a showing that communications implicated her interests alone and
were segregable from those involving KPMG's interests. Nothing in the
allegedly privileged documents or the affidavits submitted with this
motion indicates that the communications focused on her personal
interests alone. The Court therefore need not determine the parameters
of "personal matters," as Warley's disclosures would not come within
even a broad view of the term.

Warley nevertheless argues that her communications were privileged
vis-a-vis herself because

(1. the KPMG partnership agreement provides that "the General Counsel
shall act on behalf of all Members, except where a dispute arises
between an individual Member and the Firm," and

(1. counsel retained by KPMG represented both Warley and the firm in
litigation on two occasions prior to the communications here at issue.
But these contentions are not persuasive.

To begin with, the occasions on which Warley and KPMG were jointly
represented occurred in circumstances in which Warley was a witness, not
a party, to the litigation. The Court is not persuaded that
representation of an employee by employer-retained counsel where the
employee's role is that of a witness in a lawsuit against the employer
could give rise to a reasonable expectation on the part of the employee
that all communications she might have with employer-retained counsel,
even a long time thereafter, were made in the context of an individual
attorney-client relationship.

Nor has Warley offered any evidence that she in fact subjectively relied
either upon the language in the partnership agreement or the previous
litigation experience in concluding that Kronish, King & Spalding, or
Gremminger was representing her individually.

Conclusion

In the end, Warley's showings amount merely to a claim of her subjective
belief which, without more, is insufficient to meet her burden of
proving privilege. For the foregoing reasons, Warley's motion for relief
from the government's alleged violation of her attorney-client privilege
is denied.

Questions:

1. Did Warley believe KPMG's attorneys represented her personally? If
so, why was she wrong. Did anyone tell her that KPMG's attorneys were
not representing her personally?

1. Why does Warley want to claim that the documents at issue are
protected by the attorney-client privilege? Why can't she make a
privilege claims? Could KPMG have made a privilege claim over the same
information?

1. Should Warley have a malpractice claim against KPMG's attorneys?

Further Reading:

- Grace M. Giesel, Upjohn Warnings, the Attorney-Client Privilege, and
Principles of

Lawyer Ethics: Achieving Harmony, 65 U. Miami L. Rev. 109 (2010)

- Ashish S. Joshi, Corporate Miranda: Clarifying Lawyers' Loyalty
During an Internal

Investigation, American Bar Association (2009)
