---

date: Fall Term 2022
title: Civil Procedure
chapter: Special Responsibilities of Prosecutors

author: Eric M. Fink
affiliation: Elon University School of Law

reference-section-title: "References"
bibliography: '../assets/bibliography/CivProCasebook.yaml'
csl: '../assets/bibliography/casebook.csl'

output:
  pdf_document:
    template: casebook.tex
    path: ../PDF/Chap8.pdf

---

# 7.4: Prosecutorial Misconduct

Is a dream a lie if it don't come true, or is it something worse? 111

Prosecutors are responsible for enforcing criminal law. Indeed, for
better or worse, prosecutors probably have the most important role in
our modern criminal justice system. Among many other things, prosecutors
decide who to charge with crimes, which crimes to charge, and whether to
offer a plea bargain. And they exercise immense discretion in all of
those areas.

In practice, prosecutors play a much more important role in the
administration of criminal justice than judges, because only about 3% of
criminal prosecutions go to trial. The overwhelming majority of criminal
defendants plead guilty, and the prosecutors determine what sentence the
defendant will receive, with limited oversight from the judge. And
prosecutors strongly encourage defendants to plead guilty, rather than
go to trial. If a defendant refuses to plead guilty, prosecutors
typically charge aggressively and request the longest possible sentence.

At least in theory, the paramount duty of the prosecutor is to seek
justice, not a conviction. As Justice Sutherland observed in Berger v.
United States, 295 U.S. 78 (1935) , a prosecutor

is the representative not of an ordinary party to a controversy, but of
a sovereignty whose obligation to govern impartially is as compelling as
its obligation to govern at all; and whose interest, therefore, in a
criminal prosecution is not that it shall win a case, but that justice
shall be done. As such, he is in a peculiar and very definite sense the
servant of the law, the twofold aim of which is that guilt shall not
escape or innocence suffer. He may prosecute with earnestness and
vigor - indeed, he should do so. But, while he may strike hard blows, he
is not at liberty to strike foul ones. It is as much his duty to refrain
from improper methods calculated to produce a wrongful conviction as it
is to use every legitimate means to bring about a just one.

Accordingly, prosecutors should never employ improper means, even to
achieve results they believe to be just. They should always be candid
with the court and the defense, and should never suppress exculpatory
evidence or make improper statements. As Justice Jackson observed:

The qualities of a good prosecutor are as elusive and as impossible to
define as those which make a gentleman. And those who need to be told
would not understand it anyway. A sensitiveness to fair play and
sportsmanship is perhaps the best protection against the abuse of power,
and the citizens safety lies in the prosecutor who tempers zeal with
human kindness, who seeks truth and not victims, who serves the law and
not factional purposes, and who approaches his task with humility.

in

Bruce Springsteen, The River, The River (1980).




The American Bar Association has described the duties of a prosecutor in
Model Rule of Professional Responsibility 3.8 and in a separate set of
model rules governing the prosecution function. Most jurisdiction have
adopted some version of these rules. But their effectiveness is limited
by the discretion and immunity of prosecutors. For one thing, it is
often difficult or impossible to know when prosecutors have violated
their professional duties. Even if they have, they are usually protected
by absolute immunity. And historically, courts have been reluctant to
impose meaningful sanctions on prosecutors, even for egregious
misconduct.

#### Prosecution Function Standard 3-1.2: The Function of the Prosecutor

s. The office of prosecutor is charged with responsibility for
prosecutions in its jurisdiction.

s. The prosecutor is an administrator of justice, an advocate, and an
officer of the court; the prosecutor must exercise sound discretion in
the performance of his or her functions.

s. The duty of the prosecutor is to seek justice, not merely to
convict.

s. It is an important function of the prosecutor to seek to reform and
improve the administration of criminal justice. When inadequacies or
injustices in the substantive or procedural law come to the
prosecutor's attention, he or she should stimulate efforts for remedial
action.

s. It is the duty of the prosecutor to know and be guided by the
standards of professional conduct as defined by applicable professional
traditions, ethical codes, and law in the prosecutor's jurisdiction. The
prosecutor should make use of the guidance afforded by an advisory
council.

#### Model Rule 3.8: Special Responsibilities of a Prosecutor

The prosecutor in a criminal case shall:

s. refrain from prosecuting a charge that the prosecutor knows is not
supported by probable cause;

s. make reasonable efforts to assure that the accused has been advised
of the right to, and the procedure for obtaining, counsel and has been
given reasonable opportunity to obtain counsel;

s. not seek to obtain from an unrepresented accused a waiver of
important pretrial rights, such as the right to a preliminary hearing;

s. make timely disclosure to the defense of all evidence or information
known to the prosecutor that tends to negate the guilt of the accused or
mitigates the offense, and, in connection with sentencing, disclose to
the defense and to the tribunal all unprivileged mitigating information
known to the prosecutor, except when the prosecutor is relieved of this
responsibility by a protective order of the tribunal;

s. not subpoena a lawyer in a grand jury or other criminal proceeding
to present evidence about a past or present client unless the prosecutor
reasonably believes:

1. the information sought is not protected from disclosure by any
applicable privilege;




1. the evidence sought is essential to the successful completion of an
ongoing investigation or prosecution; and

1. there is no other feasible alternative to obtain the information;

s. except for statements that are necessary to inform the public of the
nature and extent of the prosecutor's action and that serve a
legitimate law enforcement purpose, refrain from making extrajudicial
comments that have a substantial likelihood of heightening public
condemnation of the accused and exercise reasonable care to prevent
investigators, law enforcement personnel, employees or other persons
assisting or associated with the prosecutor in a criminal case from
making an extrajudicial statement that the prosecutor would be
prohibited from making under Rule 3.6 or this Rule.

s. When a prosecutor knows of new, credible and material evidence
creating a reasonable likelihood that a convicted defendant did not
commit an offense of which the defendant was convicted, the prosecutor
shall:

1. promptly disclose that evidence to an appropriate court or
authority, and

1. if the conviction was obtained in the prosecutor's jurisdiction,

s. promptly disclose that evidence to the defendant unless a court
authorizes delay, and

is. undertake further investigation, or make reasonable efforts to
cause an investigation, to determine whether the defendant was convicted
of an offense that the defendant did not commit.

s. When a prosecutor knows of clear and convincing evidence
establishing that a defendant in the prosecutor's jurisdiction was
convicted of an offense that the defendant did not commit, the
prosecutor shall seek to remedy the conviction.

### Model Rule 3.8: Comments

1. A prosecutor has the responsibility of a minister of justice and not
simply that of an advocate. This responsibility carries with it specific
obligations to see that the defendant is accorded procedural justice,
that guilt is decided upon the basis of sufficient evidence, and that
special precautions are taken to prevent and to rectify the conviction
of innocent persons. The extent of mandated remedial action is a matter
of debate and varies in different jurisdictions. Many jurisdictions have
adopted the ABA Standards of Criminal Justice Relating to the
Prosecution Function, which are the product of prolonged and careful
deliberation by lawyers experienced in both criminal prosecution and
defense. Competent representation of the sovereignty may require a
prosecutor to undertake some procedural and remedial measures as a
matter of obligation. Applicable law may require other measures by the
prosecutor and knowing disregard of those obligations or a systematic
abuse of prosecutorial discretion could constitute a violation of Rule
8.4.

1. When a prosecutor knows of new, credible and material evidence
creating a reasonable likelihood that a person outside the prosecutor's
jurisdiction was convicted of a crime that the person did not commit,
paragraph (g) requires prompt disclosure to the court or other
appropriate authority, such as the chief prosecutor of the jurisdiction
where the conviction occurred. If the conviction was obtained in the
prosecutor's jurisdiction, paragraph (g) requires the prosecutor to
examine the evidence and undertake further




investigation to determine whether the defendant is in fact innocent or
make reasonable efforts to cause another appropriate authority to
undertake the necessary investigation, and to promptly disclose the
evidence to the court and, absent court-authorized delay, to the
defendant. Consistent with the objectives of Rules 4.2 and 4.3,
disclosure to a represented defendant must be made through the
defendant's counsel, and, in the case of an unrepresented defendant,
would ordinarily be accompanied by a request to a court for the
appointment of counsel to assist the defendant in taking such legal
measures as may be appropriate.

1. Under paragraph (h), once the prosecutor knows of clear and
convincing evidence that the defendant was convicted of an offense that
the defendant did not commit, the prosecutor must seek to remedy the
conviction. Necessary steps may include disclosure of the evidence to
the defendant, requesting that the court appoint counsel for an
unrepresented indigent defendant and, where appropriate, notifying the
court that the prosecutor has knowledge that the defendant did not
commit the offense of which the defendant was convicted.

1. A prosecutor's independent judgment, made in good faith, that the
new evidence is not of such nature as to trigger the obligations of
sections (g) and (h), though subsequently determined to have been
erroneous, does not constitute a violation of this Rule.




::: {style="width: 76.19607843137256%;"}
![Picture #59](../assets/img/img_0059.png)
:::

ACCUSED OF Ml RDEK---Charles D. Boblit, 2-1, and John I.. Brady, 25,
charged by Anne Arundel county police with the murder of William Brooks
on June 27, leave the Fermiale Police Station today after further
questioning. Left to right arc CpI. Richard S. Disney, Boblit. CpI.
Bernard Kiessling, Brady, Sgt. Maxwell Frye (partially obscure) and Sgt.
Edward Praley. Brady allegedly confessed to the bludgeon-murder in Cuba
last week and told police there where he and a companion, allegedly
Boblit, had tossed Brooks's body out of a car on a lonely county r oad.
Both men are being held in the jail at Annapolis.

The Evening Sun (Baltimore, Maryland), July 10, 1958, at 28

Brady v. Maryland , 373 U.S. 83 (1963)

Summary: John Leo Brady and Charles Donald Boblit were charged with the
murder of William Brooks and tried separately. Brady confessed to
participating in the murder, but claimed that Boblit actually killed
Brooks. The prosecutor suppressed a confession in which Boblit admitted
killing Brooks, and Brady was sentenced to death. The Supreme Court
reversed Brady's sentence, holding that the Due Process Clause of the
14th Amendment requires prosecutors to disclose all exculpatory
evidence.

Opinion of the Court by MR. JUSTICE DOUGLAS, announced by MR. JUSTICE
BRENNAN.

Petitioner and a companion, Boblit, were found guilty of murder in the
first degree and were sentenced to death, their convictions being
affirmed by the Court of Appeals of Maryland. Their trials were
separate, petitioner being tried first. At his trial Brady took the
stand and admitted his

::: {style="width: 76.47058823529412%;"}
![Picture #60](../assets/img/img_0060.png)
:::




participation in the crime, but he claimed that Boblit did the actual
killing. And, in his summation to the jury, Brady's counsel conceded
that Brady was guilty of murder in the first degree, asking only that
the jury return that verdict "without capital punishment." Prior to the
trial petitioner's counsel had requested the prosecution to allow him to
examine Boblit's extrajudicial statements. Several of those statements
were shown to him; but one dated July 9, 1958, in which Boblit admitted
the actual homicide, was withheld by the prosecution and did not come to
petitioner's notice until after he had been tried, convicted, and
sentenced, and after his conviction had been affirmed.

Petitioner moved the trial court for a new trial based on the newly
discovered evidence that had been suppressed by the prosecution.
Petitioner's appeal from a denial of that motion was dismissed by the
Court of Appeals without prejudice to relief under the Maryland Post
Conviction Procedure Act. The petition for post-conviction relief was
dismissed by the trial court; and on appeal the Court of Appeals held
that suppression of the evidence by the prosecution denied petitioner
due process of law and remanded the case for a retrial of the question
of punishment, not the question of guilt. The case is here on
certiorari.

The crime in question was murder committed in the perpetration of a
robbery. Punishment for that crime in Maryland is life imprisonment or
death, the jury being empowered to restrict the punishment to life by
addition of the words "without capital punishment." In Maryland, by
reason of the state constitution, the jury in a criminal case are "the
Judges of Law, as well as of fact." The question presented is whether
petitioner was denied a federal right when the Court of Appeals
restricted the new trial to the question of punishment.

We agree with the Court of Appeals that suppression of this confession
was a violation of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.

This ruling is an extension of Mooney v. Holohan, where the Court ruled
on what nondisclosure by a prosecutor violates due process:

It is a requirement that cannot be deemed to be satisfied by mere notice
and hearing if a State has contrived a conviction through the pretense
of a trial which in truth is but used as a means of depriving a
defendant of liberty through a deliberate deception of court and jury by
the presentation of testimony known to be perjured. Such a contrivance
by a State to procure the conviction and imprisonment of a defendant is
as inconsistent with the rudimentary demands of justice as is the
obtaining of a like result by intimidation.

In Pyle v. Kansas, we phrased the rule in broader terms:

Petitioner's papers are inexpertly drawn, but they do set forth
allegations that his imprisonment resulted from perjured testimony,
knowingly used by the State authorities to obtain his conviction, and
from the deliberate suppression by those same authorities of evidence
favorable to him. These allegations sufficiently charge a deprivation of
rights




guaranteed by the Federal Constitution, and, if proven, would entitle
petitioner to release from his present custody.

The Third Circuit in the Baldi case construed that statement in Pyle v.
Kansas to mean that the "suppression of evidence favorable" to the
accused was itself sufficient to amount to a denial of due process. In
Napue v. Illinois, we extended the test formulated in Mooney v. Holohan
when we said: "The same result obtains when the State, although not
soliciting false evidence, allows it to go uncorrected when it appears."

We now hold that the suppression by the prosecution of evidence
favorable to an accused upon request violates due process where the
evidence is material either to guilt or to punishment, irrespective of
the good faith or bad faith of the prosecution.

The principle of Mooney v. Holohan is not punishment of society for
misdeeds of a prosecutor but avoidance of an unfair trial to the
accused. Society wins not only when the guilty are convicted but when
criminal trials are fair; our system of the administration of justice
suffers when any accused is treated unfairly. An inscription on the
walls of the Department of Justice states the proposition candidly for
the federal domain: "The United States wins its point whenever justice
is done its citizens in the courts." 112 A prosecution that withholds
evidence on demand of an accused which, if made available, would tend to
exculpate him or reduce the penalty helps shape a trial that bears
heavily on the defendant. That casts the prosecutor in the role of an
architect of a proceeding that does not comport with standards of
justice, even though, as in the present case, his action is not "the
result of guile."

### Questions:

1. The story behind Brady v. Maryland is peculiar and sad. A thorough
narrative account is available here . Essentially, in 1958, John Leo
Brady and his friend Charles Donald Boblit decided to rob a bank,
because Brady was in love with Boblit's married sister Nancy, and had
promised her $35,000. They needed a getaway car, so they tried to steal
one from Brady's friend William Brooks, a disabled factory worker. The
plan was to kidnap Brooks and release him after the bank robbery, but in
the heat of the moment, Boblit strangled him. They split the $255.30 in
Brooks wallet, and Brady fled to Cuba. In the meantime, the police soon
found Brooks's body and went looking for Brady and Boblit. They arrested
Boblit, who took them to the body, and accused Brady of the murder.
Brady turned himself in at the United States Embassy and was extradited
back to

112 Judge Simon E. Sobeloff when Solicitor General put the idea as
follows in an address before the Judicial Conference of the Fourth
Circuit on June 29, 1954:

The Solicitor General is not a neutral, he is an advocate; but an
advocate for a client whose business is not merely to prevail in the
instant case. My client's chief business is not to achieve victory but
to establish justice. We are constantly reminded of the now classic
words penned by one of my illustrious predecessors, Frederick William
Lehmann, that the Government wins its point when justice is done in its
courts.




Maryland. Both Brady and Boblit confessed and were charged with
first-degree murder. The only question was who actually killed Brooks.
Boblit gave five confessions. In the first four, he accused Brady of the
murder. But in the fifth, he admitted that he was the murderer. Brady
and Boblit were tried separately, and the prosecutor in Brady's case
suppressed Boblit's fifth confession. Brady was sentenced to death, but
Brady v. Maryland overturned the sentence, on the basis of the
suppressed fifth confession. Afterward, Maryland had to resentence
Brady, but never did. In 1974, the Governor of Maryland granted Brady
clemency and he was paroled. He lived a quiet life, and died in 2009.

1. Brady's attorney, E. Clinton Bamberger, Jr. , was a Baltimore
corporate lawyer who represented criminal defendants pro bono. In 1965,
he quit his firm and became the first director of the the Office of
Economic Opportunity Legal Services Program, which became the Legal
Services Corporation. You can read Bamberger's account here and find a
history of the Legal Services Corporation here .

::: {style="width: 42.392156862745104%;"}
![Picture #61](../assets/img/img_0061.png)
:::

Sargent Shriver & Clint Bamberger (1966)

Taylor v. Kavanagh , 640 F. 2d 450 (2d Cir. 1981)

::: {style="width: 42.392156862745104%;"}
![Picture #62](../assets/img/img_0062.png)
:::




Summary: In 1974, Rodney Taylor was arrested and indicted for burglary,
and in 1975 he was arrested again for burglary. Assistant District
Attorney Michael Kavanagh told Taylor the grand jury had returned an
indictment on the 1975 charge, so Taylor pleaded guilty to both charges,
in exchange for Kavanagh's promise not to recommend a sentence. But
Taylor later tried to withdraw his plea, because he was never indicted
on the 1975 charge and Kavanagh withdrew his promise. The trial court
denied Taylor's motion, Kavanagh recommended the maximum sentence, and
the court imposed a 6 year sentence. The appellate court reversed and
remanded for resentencing because Kavanagh failed to honor his promise,
but Taylor received the same sentence. Accordingly, Taylor filed a §
1983 action against Kavanagh. The district court granted Kavanagh's
motion for judgment on the pleadings and the circuit court affirmed,
holding that he was protected by absolute immunity.

IRVING R. KAUFMAN, Circuit Judge:

Plaintiff Rodney Taylor, pro se, instituted this action against Michael
Kavanagh, an Assistant District Attorney for Ulster County, New York.
Claiming that Kavanagh lied to him during plea negotiations and violated
the terms of the negotiated plea agreement, Taylor seeks to set aside a
criminal conviction resulting from his guilty plea. He also requests
compensatory and punitive damages amounting to $5.5 million.

I.

Taylor was arrested in Kingston, New York, in October 1974, and on
December 20, 1974, he was indicted and charged with third degree
burglary and attempted grand larceny. He was taken into custody again on
August 14, 1975, and charged with third degree burglary and criminal
possession of a controlled substance in the seventh degree.

On June 9, 1976, Taylor, represented by counsel, pleaded guilty in the
Ulster County Court to the third degree burglary charge contained in the
December 1974 indictment. This plea was in full satisfaction of the
charges resulting from both the October 1974 and the August 1975
arrests, although no indictment concerning the events of August 1975 had
ever been returned. The court was advised that Taylor and Assistant
District Attorney Kavanagh had agreed that no recommendation or
statement would be made relating to the sentence to be imposed.

On June 7, 1977, Taylor moved in the state court to vacate his guilty
plea, claiming that 1) during plea negotiations and at the time he
entered his plea, the Assistant District Attorney had misrepresented to
him and the court that a grand jury had returned an indictment on the
charges relating to the August 1975 arrest; and 2) Kavanagh had
indicated he would not abide by his promise not to recommend any
sentence. This motion was denied.

At the sentencing proceeding in February 1978, Kavanagh made a lengthy
and detailed statement concerning Taylor's prior criminal record and
recommended that he receive the maximum punishment. The court then
sentenced Taylor to an indeterminate term of six years,




with a minimum term of two years. Taylor appealed the judgment of
conviction, but the Appellate Division affirmed, ordering, however, that
Taylor be resentenced. The court stated that although the
misrepresentation by the prosecutor concerning the existence of the
second indictment was harmless error, resentencing was necessary because
the prosecutor failed to honor his promise. Taylor eventually was
resentenced to the same term he had previously received.

Taylor filed the instant action in October 1978, claiming he was induced
to plead guilty by the Assistant District Attorney's misrepresentations
concerning the alleged second indictment. He also asserted that he
should be awarded damages for Kavanagh's breach of the plea bargain.

The defendant moved for judgment on the pleadings, which Judge Griesa
granted in July 1980. He reasoned that because a prosecutor does not
have custody over a convicted prisoner, Kavanagh was not a proper
defendant in the suit to set aside Taylor's conviction. Extending the
doctrine of absolute immunity to a prosecutor's plea bargaining
activities. Judge Griesa also held that Kavanagh was immune from
liability, and dismissed the action. We affirm.

We note at the outset that when a prisoner is challenging his
imprisonment in state facilities, his sole federal remedy is a writ of
habeas corpus. Taylor followed this approach in September 1979, seeking
a writ in the United States District Court for the Northern District of
New York. Judge Port dismissed the petition and denied a certificate of
probable cause. Taylor did not appeal this order. Accordingly, we hold
that he cannot raise this request to be set free in the instant civil
rights action.

Taylor's damages claim also fails because the Assistant District
Attorney's conduct in the plea bargaining negotiations and the
sentencing proceeding in state court is protected by the doctrine of
absolute prosecutorial immunity. Imblerv. Pachtman , 424 U.S. 409 (1976)
. Imbler provided the basis for the development of a functional approach
to the immunity question. The Court held that absolute immunity from §
1983 liability exists for those prosecutorial activities "intimately
associated with the judicial phase of the criminal process." These
protected "quasijudicial" activities include the initiation of a
prosecution and the presentation of the Government's case.

Absolute protection does not extend, however, to a prosecutor's
investigative or administrative acts. Accordingly, we have recognized
that where prosecutors act in this capacity, only the qualified "good
faith" immunity that protects, for example, police officers, is
available.

The task of determining whether a particular activity is better
characterized as "quasi-judicial" and subject to absolute immunity, or
"investigative" and subject to only qualified "good faith" immunity
requires more than the mechanical application of labels. An examination
of the functional nature of prosecutorial behavior, rather than the
status of the person performing the act, is determinative. Thus, a
prosecutor is insulated from liability where his actions directly




concern the pre-trial or trial phases of a case. For example, the
swearing of warrants to insure a witness's attendance at trial, the
falsification of evidence and the coercion of witnesses, or the failure
to drop charges until immediately before trial, have been held to be
prosecutorial activities for which absolute immunity applies. Similarly,
because a prosecutor is acting as an advocate in a judicial proceeding,
the solicitation and subornation of perjured testimony, the withholding
of evidence, or the introduction of illegally-seized evidence at trial
does not create liability in damages. The rationale for this approach is
sound, for these protected activities, while deplorable, involve
decisions of judgment affecting the course of a prosecution. The
efficient, and just, performance of the prosecutorial function would be
chilled if Government attorneys were forced to worry that their choice
of trial strategy and tactics could subject them to monetary liability,
or at best, the inconvenience of proving a "good faith" defense to a §
1983 action.

In contrast, activities in which a prosecutor engages that are
independent of prosecution are not protected by the doctrine of absolute
immunity. For example, only a "good faith" immunity is available where a
prosecutor testifies falsely as a witness, distributes extraneous
statements to the press designed to harm a suspect's reputation, or
participates in an illegal search that violates a suspect's Fourth
Amendment rights.

Decisions to engage in conduct of this character are not directly
related to the delicate judgments prosecutors must make concerning the
development of the Government's case. The "investigatory" and
"administrative" work involved in testifying before a grand jury,
accumulating evidence, and disseminating information to the press is
analogous to the tasks performed by the police, and therefore only the
same qualified "good faith" immunity is available.

This functional approach requires us to evaluate plea bargaining in
light of the general purpose of the absolute immunity doctrine. Judge
Griesa properly recognized that the purpose of the doctrine "is to
insure that a prosecutor will perform his difficult function with
complete vigor and independence, undeterred by the spectre of liability
for damages with respect to his activities." Learned Hand has told us
that the doctrine we apply today supports the just administration of the
criminal law, for we all would suffer if prosecutors "who try to do
their duty were subject to the constant dread of retaliation." The
threat of § 1983 liability would inhibit prosecutors from exercising
independent judgment and would divert their attention from the immediate
matters at hand.

We are satisfied that a prosecutor's activities in the plea bargaining
context merit the protection of absolute immunity. The plea negotiation
is an "essential component" of our system of criminal justice. It is at
this stage that the prosecutor evaluates the evidence before him,
determines the strength of the Government's case, and considers the
societal interest in disposing of the case by a negotiated guilty plea.
The effective negotiation of guilty pleas would be severely chilled if a
prosecutor were constantly concerned with the possibility of ruinous
personal liability for judgments and decisions made at this critical
stage of the criminal process.




Moreover, reference to the type of harm suffered from the alleged
misconduct during a plea negotiation demonstrates that defendant
Kavanagh should be afforded absolute immunity in this case. We recently
noted that there can be no monetary liability for injuries related
solely to the prosecution itself. Thus, if as a result of prosecutorial
misconduct, a defendant is compelled to face prosecution, or to suffer
imprisonment or pretrial detention, the harm cannot be redressed via a §
1983 civil rights suit. But, where the alleged harm is inflicted
independently from the prosecution---for example, the damage to
reputation caused by a prosecutor's dissemination of false information
to the press or the violation of Fourth Amendment privacy rights
resulting from a prosecutor's authorization of an illegal search ---
the prosecutor cannot rely on the blanket protection of absolute
immunity. In this case, the only harm caused by Kavanagh's purported
misrepresentations and his failure to abide by a promise was
imprisonment, an injury for which the Imbler doctrine of immunity
protects the prosecutor.

Finally, we note that by extending the doctrine of absolute immunity to
a prosecutor's plea bargaining activities, we do not condone Kavanagh's
alleged misconduct. Prosecutorial abuses can and should be remedied at
the trial and appellate levels, as well as by state and federal
post-conviction collateral procedures. Relief for misconduct committed
during a plea negotiation includes the setting aside of the plea or
ordering specific performance of the agreement. 113 In this case, Taylor
raised vigorous objections to Kavanagh's conduct in state court. He also
employed the federal habeas corpus procedure, without success. His
failure to prevail in both the state and federal forums cannot justify
the creation of another remedy, one which would impose a tremendous
burden on society by severely undercutting prosecutorial independence
and morale.

### Questions:

1. The New York Times reported on Taylor v. Kavanagh here .

1. In Imbler v. Pachtman, the Supreme Court held that prosecutors are
protected by absolute immunity from tort liability under § 1983 for the
exercise of their prosecutorial powers. Accordingly, even manifest abuse
of those powers cannot create tort liability for the prosecutor or the
government, although it can be the basis for discipline. The Supreme
Court held that absolute immunity is necessary in order to protect
prosecutorial independence. Do you agree?

113

Prosecutors are also subject to professional discipline for their
misconduct.




::: {style="width: 48.98039215686275%;"}
![Picture #63](../assets/img/img_0063.png)
:::

Shareef Cousin (-1999)

In re Jordan , 913 So. 2d 775 (La. 2005)

Summary: Shareef Cousin was convicted of the murder of Michael Gerardi
and sentenced to death, based on the eyewitness testimony of Connie
Babin. However, prosecutor Roger Jordan suppressed Babin's testimony
that she was not wearing contact lenses during the murder. Cousin was
exonerated and the Office of Disciplinary Counsel pursued charges
against Jordan. The Louisiana Supreme Court eventually concluded that
Jordan had violated Rule 3.8(d) and imposed a three-month suspension,
deferred.

TRAYLOR, J.

This attorney disciplinary matter arises from formal charges filed by
the Office of Disciplinary Counsel against respondent, Roger W. Jordan,
Jr., a former Orleans Parish prosecutor.

UNDERLYING FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY

::: {style="width: 4.235294117647059%;"}
![Picture #64](../assets/img/img_0064.png)
:::

::: {style="width: 9.803921568627452%;"}
![Picture #65](../assets/img/img_0065.png)
:::




On April 22, 2003, the ODC filed one count of formal charges against
respondent, alleging that he violated Rules 3.8(d) 114 and 8.4(a) 115 of
the Rules of Professional Conduct by failing to timely disclose to the
defense evidence tending to negate the guilt of the accused or mitigate
the offense. The formal charges against respondent arise from the
capital prosecution of Shareef Cousin and respondent's undisputed
failure to turn over an eyewitness's statement to the defense.

FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY OF STATE V. COUSIN :

Before addressing the merits of the case, it is necessary to discuss, in
some detail, the underlying facts and procedural history of Shareef
Cousin's criminal case.

On March 2, 1995, Michael Gerardi was shot at point-blank range during
an armed robbery attempt outside the Port of Call restaurant in New
Orleans. Connie Ann Babin, Mr. Gerardi's date that evening and the only
eyewitness to the murder, gave three separate statements to the New
Orleans Police Department during the homicide investigation. When
questioned on the night of the murder, a "visibly shaken" Ms. Babin told
the police that she "did not get a good look at the perpetrators and
probably could not identify them." In the second statement, which was
tape recorded by police at Ms. Babin's home on March 5, 1995, three days
after the murder,

Ms. Babin was asked by a New Orleans Police Department detective whether
she could "describe the person who did the shooting, his clothing?" In
response, Ms. Babin said that she remembered the shooter was wearing an
oversized denim jacket. She continued:

I don't know, it was dark and I did not have my contacts nor my glasses
so I'm coming at this at a disadvantage. I ... you know you could see
outlines and shapes and things that stick out, but es... the socks, I
remember the colorful socks, because he kept drawing my attention to it
when he kept fidgeting at his ankle area.

Ms. Babin went on to describe the shooter's hair and to say that the
shooter was in his late teens and five feet seven or eight inches tall.
After providing this description, Ms. Babin stated:

As he looked to me ... I keep getting this vision of a young man with,
with an older man's face ... er I don't know that if this is coming
... er somewhere, or if I really did see this person ... if this is
just coming from my imagination or what, but I ... every time I go over

Rule 3.8 of the Rules of Professional Conduct provides in pertinent part
as follows:

The prosecutor in a criminal case shall:

(s. Make timely disclosure to the defense of all evidence or
information known to the prosecutor that tends to negate the guilt of
the accused or mitigates the offense, except when the prosecutor is
relieved of this responsibility by a protective order of the tribunal.

Rule 8.4 of the Rules of Professional Conduct provides, in pertinent
part:

It is professional misconduct for a lawyer to:

(s. Violate or attempt to violate the Rules of Professional Conduct,
knowingly assist or induce another to do so, or do so through the acts
of another.




it and close my eyes es... I remember thinking that he had an older
man's face or a young body, on a young person ... how I visualize that,
I don't know.

On March 25, 1995, three weeks after the murder, Ms. Babin viewed a
photographic lineup presented by the police and positively identified
sixteen-year old Shareef Cousin as the shooter. Mr. Cousin was arrested
a short time later and indicted for the first degree murder of Mr.

Gerardi.

In the summer of 1995, the criminal case was assigned to respondent,
then an assistant district attorney in Orleans Parish. When respondent
was first assigned the case, he recalls that there were three
identification witnesses. However, Ms. Babin was the only witness to
positively identify Mr. Cousin.

In preparing for trial, respondent interviewed Ms. Babin. She informed
him that she is nearsighted and only needs her contacts or glasses for
nighttime driving, but not to see at close distances. Considering this
information, respondent unilaterally determined that the absence of
contacts or glasses on the night of the murder did not affect Ms.
Babin's identification of Mr. Cousin as the shooter.

Respondent testified at his disciplinary hearing that he believed Ms.
Babin's second statement provided significant additional details that
tended to corroborate her identification of Mr. Cousin, especially the
observation of the killer as having "an old man's face" on "a young
person's body." Respondent therefore concluded that, in his judgment,
Ms. Babin's second statement was not material exculpatory evidence to
which the defense would be entitled under Brady v. Maryland.
Accordingly, he did not produce that statement to Mr. Cousin's attorneys
in response to their motion for the production of exculpatory evidence.
Respondent has never maintained that he was unaware of his obligation as
a prosecutor to disclose exculpatory evidence pursuant to Brady.

Prior to the trial, Mr. Cousin's defense team filed a motion to suppress
Ms. Babin's identification of Mr. Cousin. Ms. Babin testified at the
suppression hearing, and, in response to questions by respondent,
explained the manner by which she came to identify Mr. Cousin in the
photographic lineup conducted by the NOPD. On cross-examination, Mr.
Cousin's attorney questioned Ms. Babin as to whether she had given a
description of the perpetrator to the police "when they questioned you
about this case." Ms. Babin testified she described the perpetrator as
youthful, slim, slightly shorter than Mr. Gerardi, with short cropped
hair and a very distinctive "unusual" or "evil-looking" face. Mr.
Cousin's attorney also asked whether Ms. Babin told the police "about
any characteristics that you felt were outstanding." Ms. Babin said that
she could only recall stating "that he had an older-looking face on a
younger body." While Mr. Cousin's attorney attempted to discover whether
or not Ms. Babin had given any additional descriptions to anyone else
prior to the photographic lineup, respondent objected, and the question
was rephrased. Eventually, Mr. Cousin's attorney questioned Ms. Babin as
to whether she had provided any additional statements to the police
other than the night of the murder and the photographic lineup. Ms.
Babin testified that her description had been consistent throughout.
Thus, the only




Ill

way that the defense could have known about Statement 2 would have been
disclosure by respondent.

Ms. Babin testified at trial and repeated her positive identification of
Mr. Cousin. Mr. Cousin was convicted of first degree murder. The same
jury subsequently sentenced him to death in a bifurcated penalty phase.

Several days after the completion of the guilt phase of the trial but
before the penalty phase, a copy of Statement 2 was delivered
anonymously to defense counsel. On appeal, the defense raised as error
respondent's failure to produce Statement 2 prior to trial. This Court
did not reach that issue. Instead, a unanimous Court reversed Mr.
Cousin's conviction and death sentence based on the erroneous admission
of a witness' testimony as impeachment evidence and respondent's
improper use of that evidence in closing argument. Nevertheless, the
Court commented in footnotes that Ms. Babin's second statement was
"obviously" exculpatory, material to the issue of guilt, and "clearly"
should have been produced to the defense under Brady and Kyles v.
Whitley.

Following this court's decision in Cousin , the Orleans Parish District
Attorney's Office elected not to retry Mr. Cousin for the murder of
Michael Gerardi.

DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS

DISCIPLINARY COMPLAINT

In May 1998, Mr. Cousin and his sister, Tonya Cropper, filed a complaint
against respondent with the ODC, alleging, among other things, that
respondent wrongfully suppressed Brady evidence by failing to disclose
Ms. Babin's second statement. In his July 1998 response to the
complaint, respondent asserted his belief that the witness's statement
at issue was more inculpatory than exculpatory, and his determination
that disclosure of the statement was not required by Brady. Respondent
reiterated this assertion in his sworn statement taken by the ODC on
June 16, 1999.

Following its investigation, the ODC dismissed the complaint against
respondent. Ms. Cropper appealed the dismissal, but the hearing
committee found that the ODC did not abuse its discretion in dismissing
the complaint. Subsequently, the disciplinary board remanded the matter
to the ODC with instructions to file formal charges against respondent.

FORMAL HEARING

The hearing committee conducted a formal hearing on the charges. ODC
called several witnesses in its case in chief, including respondent,
Shareef Cousin's defense attorney, and the complainant, Tonya Cropper.
Respondent presented character testimony from several members of the
bench and bar.




Hearing Committee Recommendation

In a split decision, the chair and the public member of the committee
found that the ODC did not prove a violation of Rules 3.8(d) and 8.4(a)
as charged, and recommended that the formal charges against respondent
be dismissed. In a nineteen page report, the majority found respondent's
testimony credible regarding the nature of the Brady material. The
committee acknowledged that respondent was in possession of the
statement yet failed to disclose the second statement to the defense.
However, the committee found no violation of Rule 3.8, as the committee
determined that respondent reasonably believed that Ms. Babin's
statement was inculpatory rather than exculpatory. The committee
concluded that the defense was aware of the second statement and that it
did not believe that the prosecution had an obligation "to help out the
defense" by providing the statement. Based on these factual
determinations, the majority of the committee concluded that respondent
did not violate the Rules of Professional Conduct.

The lawyer member of the committee dissented, noting her objection to
the majority's interpretation of a prosecutor's duty under Brady. She
commented that she did not believe that the prosecutor has the
discretion to determine whether to disclose exculpatory evidence to the
defense. Rather, she interpreted Brady as imposing an affirmative duty
on the prosecutor to disclose material exculpatory evidence,
irrespective of whether a request was made by the defense.

The ODC filed an objection to the hearing committee's report and
recommendation.

Ruling of the Disciplinary Board

The disciplinary board determined that respondent technically violated
the Rules of Professional Conduct, but found that no discipline was
appropriate and dismissed the formal charges against respondent. While
the board adopted the hearing committee's factual findings, it rejected
the committee's legal conclusions and application of the Rules of
Professional Conduct. The board determined that the committee erred in
its finding that respondent did not violate either Brady or Rule 3.8(d)
when he failed to produce Ms. Babin's second statement. The board
concluded that respondent was ethically bound to voluntarily disclose
Statement 2, which tended to negate the guilt of the accused by calling
into question Ms. Babin's positive identification of Cousin as the
perpetrator of the crime. By failing to do so, respondent violated Rule
3.8(d).

The board found no aggravating factors present in this case, but found
"numerous and weighty" mitigating factors, including the absence of a
prior disciplinary record, absence of a dishonest or selfish motive,
full and free disclosure to the disciplinary board and a cooperative
attitude toward the proceedings, character and reputation, and remorse.
The board concluded:

While the board finds that respondent's actions constitute a technical
violation of the Rules of Professional Conduct, considering all of the
factors, particularly respondent's good faith and lack of intent, the
lack of any actual injury, respondent's excellent reputation among
judges and colleagues and his unblemished disciplinary record, and




considering the purpose of lawyer discipline, the board finds that no
formal discipline is warranted.

Based on this reasoning, the formal charges against respondent were
dismissed.

The ODC sought review of the board's ruling in this Court. We ordered
the parties to submit briefs addressing the issue of whether the record
supports the disciplinary board's report. After reviewing the briefs
filed by both parties, we docketed the matter for oral argument.

DISCUSSION

In our system of justice, we entrust vast discretion to a prosecutor.
Because a prosecutor is given such great power and discretion, he is
also charged with a high ethical standard. A prosecutor stands as the
representative of the people of the State of Louisiana. He is entrusted
with upholding the integrity of the criminal justice system by ensuring
that justice is served for both the victims of crimes and the accused.
"Society wins not only when the guilty are convicted but when criminal
trials are fair; our system of the administration of justice suffers
when any accused is treated unfairly." The actions, or inactions in this
case, of the prosecutor are paramount to a fair administration of
justice; and the people of this state must have confidence in a
prosecutor's integrity in performing his duty to disclose exculpatory
evidence in order for the system to be just. Any intentional deviation
from the principle of the fair administration of justice will be dealt
with harshly by this Court.

This is a case of first impression in the State of Louisiana. Never
before have we been confronted with the issue of disciplining a
prosecutor for failing to disclose "evidence or information known to the
prosecutor that tends to negate the guilt of the accused or mitigates
the offense, and, in connection with sentencing, disclose to the defense
and to the tribunal all unprivileged mitigating information known to the
prosecutor." The language of Rule 3.8(d) is recognizably similar to the
prosecutor's duty set forth in Brady and its progeny. Moreover, the
Louisiana Code of Criminal Procedure likewise imposes a corresponding
statutory duty on a prosecutor to disclose exculpatory evidence to the
defendant.

The duty of a prosecutor to disclose exculpatory evidence is embedded in
the principle that a criminal defendant is deprived of a fair trial when
the state withholds exculpatory evidence that is material to guilt or
punishment. The state's failure to disclose material evidence favorable
to a criminal defendant implicates more than the defendant's discovery
rights; the prosecutor has an affirmative duty to disclose such evidence
under the Fourteenth Amendment's Due Process Clause. Failure to reveal
this evidence implicates the defendant's right to a fair trial.

Whether the questioned evidence is material under Brady has been
explained by this Court in Marshall:

The issue is whether the exculpatory evidence is material under the
Brady-Bagley-Kyles line of cases. Evidence is material only if it is
reasonably probable that the result of the




proceeding would have been different had the evidence been disclosed to
the defense. A reasonable probability is one which is sufficient to
undermine confidence in the outcome. This Court must provide a
cumulative evaluation of the suppressed evidence, keeping in mind that
Marshall does not have to show that, with the addition of the suppressed
evidence, his trial would have resulted in acquittal or that there would
be an insufficiency of the evidence to support a conviction. Marshall
need only show that "disclosure of the suppressed evidence to competent
counsel would have made a different result reasonably probable."

During his testimony before the hearing committee, respondent testified
that he did not believe Ms. Babin's second statement was material and
did not qualify as the type of evidence to be disclosed under Brady.
Specifically, respondent stated that he thought the evidence was
inculpatory rather than exculpatory as Ms. Babin recounted specific
details regarding the defendant's clothing and colorful socks. While the
definition of materiality set forth in Kyles and its progeny may be seen
as leaving a prosecutor with a degree of discretion, it does not.

Exculpatory evidence includes evidence which impeaches the testimony of
a witness whose credibility or reliability may determine guilt or
innocence. Additionally, United States v. Bagley reiterates the
principle that there is no distinction between exculpatory evidence and
impeachment evidence under Brady. Clearly, Ms. Babin's second statement
negates her ability to positively identify the defendant in a lineup.
The statement should have been disclosed to the defense. As we noted in
our decision overruling Mr. Cousin's conviction, citing Justice Souter's
eloquent statement in Kyles , a prosecutor anxious about "tacking too
close to the wind will disclose a favorable piece of evidence" and "will
resolve doubtful questions in favor of disclosure." Respondent failed to
produce evidence which was clearly exculpatory and should have resolved
this issue in favor of disclosure.

Accordingly, we agree with the factual findings of the disciplinary
board that respondent violated Rule 3.8(d) by failing to disclose the
second statement of Ms. Babin to the defendant.

SANCTIONS

In considering the issue of sanctions, we are mindful that disciplinary
proceedings are designed to maintain high standards of conduct, protect
the public, preserve the integrity of the profession, and deter future
misconduct. The discipline to be imposed depends upon the facts of each
case and the seriousness of the offenses involved, considered in light
of any aggravating and mitigating circumstances. Thus, we must consider
the facts as they are presented herein in deciding the type of
discipline to impose on respondent.

The violation of Rule 3.8(d) by a prosecutor raises a great deal of
concern to this Court. Rule 3.8(d) exists to ensure that the integrity
of the prosecutorial arm of our criminal justice system is maintained.
Moreover, prosecutors are in a unique position from other members of the
bar as they are immune from civil liability under Imblerv. Pachtman.
Neither are they realistically subject to criminal sanctions. Our
research reveals only one instance in which a judge held a




prosecutor in contempt of court for failing to disclose evidence. Thus,
absent consequences being imposed by this Court under its authority over
disciplinary matters, prosecutors face no realistic consequences for
Brady violations.

In deciding the appropriate sanction, we begin our analysis with Supreme
Court Rule XIX, § 10(C), which sets forth the following considerations
in imposing discipline:

1. Whether the lawyer has violated a duty owed to a client, to the
public, to the legal system, or to the profession;

1. Whether the lawyer acted intentionally, knowingly, or negligently;

1. The amount of the actual or potential injury caused by the lawyer's
misconduct; and

1. The existence of any aggravating or mitigating factors.

By withholding material exculpatory evidence from a criminal defendant,
respondent violated a duty owed to the public. As a prosecutor,
respondent is charged with a high ethical standard and may not
carelessly skirt his obligation. Although neither Brady nor Rule 3.8
incorporates a mental element, Rule XIX, § 10(C) does. Based on the
testimony of respondent and the character evidence discussed below, we
find that respondent knowingly withheld Brady evidence. 116 As to the
element regarding actual injury, this Court reversed Shareef Cousin's
conviction on other grounds and granted him a new trial. However, this
Court's actions in reversing the conviction does not vitiate the
potential injury to the criminal justice system, or to Cousin, caused by
respondent's actions, and warrants serious consideration and discipline
by this Court.

As to the issue of aggravating and mitigating factors, we find the only
aggravating factor present in this case is respondent's substantial
experience as a prosecutor. However, on the issue of mitigation, we find
a host of factors present. Specifically, we find the absence of any
prior disciplinary record, absence of a dishonest motive, full and free
disclosure to the board, a cooperative attitude towards the proceedings,
and good character and reputation in the legal community.

As stated above, the issue of discipline against a prosecutor for his
violation of Rule 3.8 is res nova in the State of Louisiana. While this
Court has the benefit of Rule XIX considerations, we have no prior case
law on the issue. However, Louisiana is not the first jurisdiction to
address the issue of a prosecutor's failure to disclose evidence to a
defendant. Our brethren in North Carolina, Kansas, South Carolina, Ohio
and Iowa have imposed discipline against an attorney who fails to
disclose evidence pursuant to Brady. Thus, we find some guidance in
their decisions. The sanctions imposed in other jurisdictions range from
public reprimand or censure to a six-month suspension from the practice
of law. Based upon the facts of this case, we conclude the appropriate
baseline sanction for respondent's misconduct is a three-month

116 The ABA's Standards for Imposing Lawyer Sanctions, defines
"knowledge" as:

The conscious awareness of the nature or attendant circumstances of the
conduct but without the conscious objective or purpose to accomplish a
particular result.




Ill

suspension from the practice of law. However, in light of the mitigating
factors, we will defer this suspension in its entirety, subject to the
condition that any misconduct during a one-year period following the
finality of this judgment may be grounds for making the deferred
suspension executory, or imposing additional discipline, as appropriate.

JOHNSON, J. concurs in part, dissents in part, for the reasons that
follow.

I concur in the majority's opinion that respondent knowingly withheld
Brady evidence, that respondent's experience as a prosecutor was an
aggravating factor, that the Court's actions in reversing defendant's
conviction failed to invalidate the potential injury to the criminal
justice system, or to defendant, and that respondent's behavior warrants
discipline by this Court. However, because of the actual injury caused
by respondent's prosecutorial misconduct, I dissent from the majority's
conclusion that respondent's suspension should be deferred.

As cited in the majority opinion, Louisiana Supreme Court Rule XIX, §
10(c) sets forth four factors to be considered when imposing lawyer
discipline. The third factor in this analysis is the "amount of the
actual or potential injury caused by the lawyer's misconduct." Regarding
actual injury, the majority opinion states that "this Court reversed
Shareef Cousin's conviction on other grounds and granted him a new
trial." Thus, the majority opinion adopts the reasoning, stated
explicitly by the disciplinary board in the lower proceedings, that no
injury resulted from respondent's conduct since the defendant's
conviction was reversed. Although reversal of defendant's sentence of
death by lethal injection amends the wrongful sentence, it fails to
negate the actual injury caused by respondent's misconduct.

Pursuant to Louisiana Supreme Court Rule XIX, § 10(c), this court has
held that an attorney caused an actual injury because the attorney's
failure to pay a client's medical bill resulted in a negative report to
a credit agency. In another matter, we determined that an attorney
caused an actual injury when he abandoned his legal practice and failed
to return a $750 fee to a client and delayed the client's legal
proceedings. In my view, the taking of a liberty interest is an even
greater injury. As one legal commentator noted, "liberty is absolute and
the loss of it is the greatest of all human injustices." Indeed, how can
we ignore the injury caused by the wrongful taking of freedom, or the
despair that inevitably follows as a defendant sits on death row and
prepares for execution by lethal injection. "The execution of a legally
and factually innocent person would be a constitutionally intolerable
event," wrote Justice Sandra Day O'Connor in Herrera v. Collins. It is
noteworthy that Shareef Cousin faced this predicament at the age of
sixteen. The United States Supreme Court has since determined that
execution of individuals who were under the age of 18 at the time of
their capital crimes is unconstitutional.

Wrongful conviction constitutes an actual injury. Moreover, the United
States Supreme Court has held that a wrongful conviction "has continuing
collateral consequences." Michael Anthony Williams, who was recently
freed from Angola State Penitentiary after serving 24 years for a crime
he did not commit, and who, like Shareef Cousin, was convicted at the
age of sixteen, described his time in prison as "a living hell." He
stated that "a lot of terrible things happened to me while I was in
there." Williams confessed that when he was younger, he was sexually




abused "while guards turned their backs." Persons wrongfully convicted
lose time during incarceration that cannot be retrieved. Furthermore,
inmates, generally, leave prison with no savings, dismal employment
prospects, and oftentimes medical and mental issues. Wrongful conviction
can also cause significant stress on family relationships including the
financial pressure that may have been created by legal fees associated
with the wrongful conviction.

In the present case, disciplinary charges were filed against respondent
by Shareef Cousin and his sister, Tonya Cropper. Tonya Cropper's
testimony at the Hearing Committee describes the emotional turmoil that
the Cousin family endured as a result of defendant's wrongful
conviction. 117

In 1976, the United States Supreme Court held that individual
prosecutors have absolute immunity under common law tort claims as well
as section 1983 suits. This court adopted the

117 Cropper now resides in Boston, Massachusetts but at the time of the
conviction and sentencing, she resided in Plano, Texas. During the trial
Cropper drove from Plano and stayed through the duration of the trial.
Cropper testified that after the conviction and sentencing she was
numbed by the whole procedure. She couldn't believe that her brother
was going to die. During this time her family was bitter with the
justice system; they still hold resentment towards the courts.

Cropper said that Roger Jordan's insistence on the guilt of her brother
infuriated her. On the Geraldo talk show, it was Jordan's face that
represented her brother's conviction and death sentence. Even after the
dismissal of the charges, she stated that Jordan continued to insist on
the guilt of her brother.

Cropper expressed how she was too angry, hurt, and confused to testify
during the penalty phase of the trial. She told how her brother had an
outburst of emotion in court during Jordan's closing statement. The
same emotional fury flowed through her veins. After the denial of a new
trial, she, her four sisters, and her mother had an emotional,
tear-filled prayer with Cousin before he was sent to Angola State
Penitentiary. As he was taken away from his family, Cousin cried for the
first time since the ordeal began.

She tells how she hated to see her brother in jail, and how she had only
visited him once since he was initially arrested for the murder. She
spent a lot of time dwelling on the fact that her brother was going to
die of lethal injection. She finally decided to subject herself to
seeing her brother behind bars.

Cropper goes on to tell of the travel accommodations that had to be made
so the whole family would have an opportunity to see her brother in
jail. She drove eight hours from Texas to pick her sisters and mom up;
none of them had a car. The family would then travel two and a half
hours to Angola. After the visit she would transport her family back to
New Orleans. She would then rest for several hours and then drive back
to Texas. This was all in one day. She made the trip faithfully every
month until Cousin was removed from death row. Her daughter also had to
endure seeing her uncle in jail. She never wanted her child to think her
uncle was a murderer.

She felt Jordan had no regard for her family or for her brothers rights
because her brother was arrested for four separate counts of armed
robbery. She believes Jordan thought no one cared about her brother and
he could do anything to win at all cost, regardless of her brother's
due process rights. Her brother believed his attorney who told him that
the robbery plea bargain was in his best interest because the judge was
going to try him (and sentence him) on each count separately, and he
would have to serve two times the sentence he is currently serving if
found guilty of those robberies separately. Cropper did not understand
why Jordan seemed to feel that her brother's life was so disposable.

Cropper explained that an injustice has been done not only to the Cousin
family but also to the victim, Gerardi's, family because that family has
no closure in the death of their son.




Imbier court's reasoning in Knapper v. Cormick, when we determined that
"prosecutors are entitled to absolute immunity for conduct within the
course and scope of their prosecutorial functions." Thus, prosecutors
have absolute immunity even in instances, such as the present case,
where the prosecutor suppressed exculpatory information. However, the
Imbler decision also identifies the legal community's responsibility for
maintaining the integrity of prosecutors and deterring prosecutors from
violating standards of the legal profession. The court concluded that "a
prosecutor stands perhaps unique, among officials whose acts could
deprive persons of constitutional rights, in his amenability to
professional discipline by an association of his peers." Therefore, our
function in dispensing disciplinary action is critical both for
upholding the highest ethical and professional standards among
prosecutors and ensuring fundamental fairness for defendants. As
expressed by the Honorable Calvin Johnson of Orleans Parish Criminal
Court, in a letter contained in the record to then Orleans Parish
District Attorney Harry Connick, Rule 3.8 was established to ensure
professional responsibility among lawyers as well as to guarantee the
constitutional due process rights of criminal defendants. 118

In determining whether respondent caused an actual injury pursuant to
Louisiana's Supreme Court Rule XIX, § 10(c), our focus should be on the
unnecessary and unlawful suffering of the wrongfully convicted as a
result of the prosecutorial misconduct, not just the reversal of the
wrongfully imposed sentence. Because, in my view, loss of a liberty
interest is more valuable than financial loss or injury to one's credit,
I would impose an actual period of suspension.

118

In addition to the actual injury caused by respondent's violation of
Rule 3.8, there are other allegations of misconduct cited in the
complaint, though no formal charges were brought by the Office of
Disciplinary Counsel. Specifically, during testimony at a motion for new
trial, it was alleged that Jordan's co-counsel, Assistant District
Attorney Byron Berry, may have removed several of defendant's alibi
witnesses from outside the courtroom to the District Attorney's office.
Later, when the time came for those witnesses to be called, respondent
failed to tell defense counsel where the witnesses were.

Furthermore, there are some concerns with defendant's guilty pleas to
armed robbery. Cousin was arrested and charged with First Degree Murder
on March 27, 1995. This is the arrest for the instant matter. The next
day, March 28, 1995, Cousin was arrested and charged with four counts of
armed robbery. Cousin pled guilty to the armed robberies before he was
found guilty of murder, but after he had been arrested and charged with
the crime.

Cousin later petitioned this Court to grant supervisory writs and order
post-conviction relief for the judgments entered against him in the
armed robbery cases. In his writ application, Cousin argued that his
guilty plea had been involuntary since he was never advised of the
consequences of his plea. He claimed that he had not been apprised that
his guilty plea would be used against him as four aggravating factors in
the penalty phase of his capital trial. Additionally, he argued that he
was not told that his guilty plea would prevent him from testifying in
his capital trial, as the "prior" convictions would be used to impeach
him if he got on the stand. This court denied defendant's application
for writ of certiorari. J. Johnson dissented, stating that she was "not
convinced that Cousin understood the consequences of his guilty pleas."




::: {style="width: 44.90196078431373%;"}
![Picture #66](../assets/img/img_0066.png)
:::

Questions:

1. On May 2, 1995, at about 10:20 P.M., Michael Gerardi and Connie
Babin left the Port of Call restaurant in the French Quarter of New
Orleans. While they were walking to Gerardi's truck, three men followed
them, and one of the men shot and killed Gerardi. Shortly afterward, the
New Orleans police arrested James Rowell on nine counts of armed
robbery. In exchange for reduced charges, Rowell provided information to
the police. Among other things, he claimed that Shareef Cousin had
bragged about killing Gerardi. The police arrested Cousin, and Babin
eventually identified him as the killer. In fact, Cousin was playing
basketball when Gerardi was killed. The basketball game was videotaped,
and a clock showed that it ended at about 10:00 P.M., after which coach
Eric White drove Cousin and three other players home. At trial, Jordan
not only suppressed Babin's testimony that she was not wearing contact
lenses during the murder, but also altered recorded statements made by
White in order to suppress the videotape of the basketball game and
prevented the other basketball players from testifying. On January 25,
1996, Cousin was convicted of first-degree murder and sentenced to
death. The Louisiana Supreme Court reversed Cousins's murder conviction
and death sentence in 1998. State v. Cousin , 710 So. 2d 1065 (La. 1998)
. But Cousin had also pleaded guilty to four counts of armed robbery,
and was not released from prison until 2005. Cousins told his story in
CNN , NPR , and TIME , among other publications. You can watch a short
video of Cousins describing his experiences here . After his release
from prison, Cousins began working for Stephen Bright at the Southern
Center for Human Rights in Atlanta. Unfortunately, Cousins applied for
credit cards in Bright's name and charged $42,000. In 2008 , he pleaded
guilty to identity theft and credit card fraud and served three years in
prison. He currently lives in New Orleans and is active in criminal
justice reform advocacy.

1. The New York Times reported on the Orleans Parish District Attorney
Office's long history of prosecutorial misconduct here . The Huffington
Post reported on prosecutorial misconduct in New Orleans and elsewhere
here.

::: {style="width: 4.235294117647059%;"}
![Picture #67](../assets/img/img_0067.png)
:::




1. In assessing Jordan's culpability, the Louisiana Supreme Court found
only one aggravating factor and many mitigating factors. How would you
assess Jordan's culpability?

1. The Louisiana Supreme Court sanctioned Jordan by imposing a
three-month suspension, deferred. The dissent argued that the suspension
should not be deferred. What sanction would you have imposed, if any?

::: {style="width: 76.66666666666667%;"}
![Picture #68](../assets/img/img_0068.png)
:::

Eric Hillman (2014)

Hillman v. Nueces County (Tex. 2019)

Summary: Eric Hillman was an assistant district attorney in Nueces
County, Texas. In 2014, he prosecuted a defendant for intoxicated
assault and leaving the scene of an accident. In the course of
investigating the case, Hillman interviewed a witness who stated the
defendant was not intoxicated. The police report did not identify the
witness, so Hillman informed his supervisor that he needed to disclose
the witness to the defense, but his supervisor told him not to disclose.
Hillman consulted with the State Bar Ethics Hotline and the Texas Center
for Legal Ethics. Both told him to disclose, so he did, and he was
fired. Hillman filed a wrongful termination action against Nueces
County, but the trial court granted the county's motion to dismiss and
the appeals court affirmed. The Texas Supreme Court also affirmed,
holding that sovereign immunity barred Hillman's action.

JEFFREY S. BOYD, Justice.

::: {style="width: 1.0588235294117647%;"}
![Picture #69](../assets/img/img_0069.png)
:::

::: {style="width: 76.66666666666667%;"}
![Picture #70](../assets/img/img_0070.png)
:::




A former assistant district attorney filed this suit alleging that the
county wrongfully terminated his employment because he refused his
supervisor's order to withhold exculpatory evidence from a criminal
defendant. The trial court dismissed the suit for lack of jurisdiction,
and the court of appeals affirmed. Because we agree with those courts
that governmental immunity bars the suit, we also affirm.

I. Background

Eric Hillman served as an assistant district attorney in Nueces County
for two years. While preparing to prosecute a defendant charged with
intoxicated assault and leaving the scene of an accident, Hillman
discovered and interviewed a witness who said she was with the defendant
the night of the incident and he was not intoxicated. Because the police
report did not identify this witness, Hillman told his supervisor that
he needed to disclose the witness to the defendant's attorney. The
supervisor disagreed and instructed Hillman not to disclose the witness.
Believing that he was legally required to disclose the witness, Hillman
called the State Bar Ethics Hotline and the Texas Center for Legal
Ethics for advice. Both told him he should disclose the information.

Three days before the defendant's trial, the victim confirmed to Hillman
that the witness had been present at the scene. Hillman relayed this
information to his supervisor and informed her that he had decided to
disclose the witness to the defense attorney. On the day of trial,
Hillman was fired for "failing to follow instructions." He alleges he
was fired solely for refusing to withhold exculpatory evidence.

Hillman sued the County, the District Attorney's Office, and
then-District Attorney Mark Skurka, in his official capacity, seeking
actual damages for lost wages and benefits, mental anguish, pain and
suffering, and loss of earning capacity, and exemplary damages. The
County moved to dismiss on the ground that governmental immunity bars
Hillman's claims. The trial court agreed and dismissed the case, and the
court of appeals affirmed.

Is. Governmental Immunity

Sovereign immunity---usually called governmental immunity when referring
to political subdivisions---protects governmental entities against suits
and legal liabilities. The County pleaded immunity from both suit and
liability in this case, but only immunity from suit implicates the
courts' jurisdiction. Because the trial court dismissed this case for
lack of jurisdiction, we focus here solely on governmental immunity from
suit. Because Hillman filed suit seeking money damages against a county
and its department and official, governmental immunity bars this suit
unless immunity has been waived.

Like every court of appeals that has addressed the issue, the court of
appeals concluded here that governmental immunity applies to Hillman's
wrongful-termination claim and has not been waived. Presenting three
alternative grounds for reversal, Hillman argues that (1) this Court
abrogated or waived the County's immunity from this type of suit in
Sabine Pilot Service, Inc. v.




Hauck, in which we recognized a cause of action for wrongful termination
of an at-will employee for refusal to perform an illegal act, (2) the
Texas legislature waived the County's immunity through the Michael
Morton Act, or (3) we should abrogate or waive the County's immunity
from such suits today. Although Hillman and his supporting amici bolster
these grounds with serious and important policy concerns, we ultimately
find the grounds themselves unconvincing.

A. Sabine Pilot

Texas---"steadfastly an at-will employment state"---generally permits
both employers and employees to terminate their relationship at any time
for any reason unless they contractually agree otherwise. The law
recognizes, however, a number of exceptions to this rule. One "very
narrow exception to the employment-at-will doctrine," which we adopted
in Sabine Pilot, prohibits employers from terminating at-will employees
"for the sole reason that the employee refused to perform an illegal
act." An employer who terminates an employee solely for that reason is
liable to the employee for all resulting "reasonable tort damages,
including punitive damages."

Sabine Pilot involved claims against a private-sector employer, and this
Court's very brief opinion never mentioned the duties or obligations of
government employers. Noting that the Court did not expressly limit the
exception to private employers or declare it inapplicable to government
employers, Hillman argues that Sabine Pilot prohibits all
employers---government as well as private---from terminating at-will
employees solely for refusing to perform an illegal act. This argument
reads too much into Sabine Pilot. Nothing in that opinion indicates
anything regarding government employers. Because we simply did not
consider or address whether the exception applies to government
employers in Sabine Pilot, it provides no controlling principle on that
issue here.

Hillman suggests that even if Sabine Pilot did not resolve the issue, we
can and should clarify today that the Sabine Pilot exception applies to
government employers. We have no problem holding that the exception
applies to all Texas employers, in the sense that they all have a
common-law-tort duty not to terminate at-will employees solely because
the employee refuses to perform an illegal act. But holding that the
Sabine Pilot exception applies to government employers does not help
Hillman. Hillman's problem is not that the duty does not apply to
government employers, but that immunity bars any suit for a government
employer's breach of that duty.

Governmental immunity protects all governmental entities against suits
and liabilities for their governmental actions, even when acting as
employers. The legislature has provided a limited waiver of that
immunity for certain tort and breach-of-contract actions. These statutes
do not create tort or contractual duties or impose them on governmental
entities. Those common-law duties preexist the statutes and apply to
governmental entities as to anyone else, but immunity bars suits for
breach of those duties.




Instead of creating or imposing duties, the statutes waive the immunity
that would otherwise protect the government, removing the barrier that
precludes suits or liability for breach of those preexisting common-law
duties. So although we can say that the common-law-tort duty we
recognized in Sabine Pilot applies to all Texas employers, Hillman still
cannot pursue this suit for the County's alleged breach of that duty
unless the legislature has waived the County's governmental immunity.
Because Sabine Pilot did not involve a governmental defendant and did
not address governmental immunity or its waiver, it does not support
Hillman's argument that the trial court had jurisdiction over his claim.

B. The Michael Morton Act

More than fifty-five years ago, the United States Supreme Court held
that the Constitution's dueprocess clause prohibits criminal prosecutors
from suppressing material evidence that is "favorable to an accused."
Just over five years ago, the Texas legislature statutorily addressed
"Brady violations" by passing the Michael Morton Act. The Michael Morton
Act expressly requires prosecutors to

disclose to the defendant any exculpatory, impeachment, or mitigating
document, item, or information in the possession, custody, or control of
the state that tends to negate the guilt of the defendant or would tend
to reduce the punishment for the offense charged.

Prosecutors must disclose such information whenever they discover it,
whether "before, during, or after trial."

Hillman contends that the Michael Morton Act required him to disclose
the witness's information in the case he was prosecuting, so the County
wrongfully terminated him for refusing to perform an illegal act. But
even accepting these assertions as true, the issue here is not whether
Hillman has pleaded a valid Sabine Pilot claim, but whether the Act
waives the County's governmental immunity against that claim.

To waive governmental immunity, a statute must use "clear and
unambiguous language" expressing that intent. When deciding whether a
statute clearly and unambiguously waives governmental immunity, we

1. consider "whether the statutory provisions, even if not a model of
clarity, waive immunity without doubt";

1. resolve any "ambiguity as to waiver in favor of retaining immunity";

1. generally find waiver "if the Legislature requires that the
governmental entity be joined in a lawsuit even though the entity would
otherwise be immune from suit";

1. consider whether the legislature "provided an objective limitation
on the governmental entity's potential liability"; and

1. consider "whether the statutory provisions would serve any purpose
absent a waiver of immunity."




Like the Sabine Pilot opinion, the Michael Morton Act does not address
governmental immunity or waiver at all. None of its language waives
immunity "without doubt" or even creates any ambiguity on the point. The
Act does not require that the government be joined in any lawsuit or
impose any limitation on the government's potential liability in such a
suit. Implicating only the fifth consideration, Hillman argues that the
Act necessarily must waive the County's immunity from his
wrongful-termination suit because the Act's sole purpose is to require
prosecutors to disclose exculpatory evidence. He contends that the Act
would be "illusory" unless it waives immunity from Sabine Pilot claims,
and finding no waiver "would defeat the sole purpose for passing the
Michael Morton Act in the first place." As Hillman puts it, "A law
making it a crime for a prosecutor to withhold evidence from the
defense, but at the same time allowing the prosecutor's supervisor to
fire him for refusing to do so is nonsensical and cannot possibly be
what the legislature intended when it enacted the Michael Morton Act."

These arguments read too much into the Michael Morton Act. The Act
serves obvious purposes separate and apart from addressing any
wrongful-termination issues. It codifies and "supplements" prosecutors'
constitutional obligations under Brady. It requires production of
several items that "previously were not discoverable" in criminal cases,
including "written witness statements, written communications between
the State and its agents, and work product." And violations of the Act
may constitute grounds for reversing a conviction.

Of course, the legislature could always do more to ensure that
prosecutors disclose exculpatory information. Presumably, at least,
prosecutors would be more likely to disclose such information if the Act
authorized civil-damages suits---and waived immunity for such suits---
against those who violate its requirements or who terminate subordinates
who refuse to violate them. Whether countervailing policy concerns
outweigh such benefits, however, "is the very essence of legislative
choice." And the mere fact that a statute prohibits a government
official from engaging in particular conduct does not establish that the
statute also waives governmental immunity whenever a government employer
terminates an employee for refusing to engage in that conduct. If that
were true, every statutory prohibition would waive immunity from
wrongfultermination claims.

Nothing in the Michael Morton Act indicates a legislative intent to
waive governmental immunity from a wrongful-termination suit under
Sabine Pilot. No explicit language or even ambiguous language indicates
such an intent. We hold that the Michael Morton Act does not waive the
County's governmental immunity from this suit.

C. Judicial Abrogation of Immunity

Alternatively, Hillman urges us to abolish the "ancient and antiquated"
doctrine of governmental immunity altogether, or at least modify it to
allow for Sabine Pilot claims against governmental entities. He notes
that sovereign immunity developed and exists as a common-law doctrine,
and "it remains the judiciary's responsibility to define the boundaries
of the common-law doctrine and to determine under what circumstances
sovereign immunity exists in the first instance." But




in fulfilling that responsibility, we must respect both our precedent
and our limitations under the constitutional separation of powers.

Having existed for more than six hundred years, the
governmental-immunity doctrine is "an established principle of
jurisprudence in all civilized nations." We first recognized it as a
principle of Texas law more than 170 years ago. Although the
justifications for its existence have evolved through the years, we have
steadfastly retained it in modern times precisely because it shields
"the public from the costs and consequences of improvident actions of
their governments," and ensures that the taxes the public pays are used
"for their intended purposes."

We are not blind to the truism that, "just as immunity is inherent to
sovereignty, unfairness is inherent to immunity." But as the Court's
majority explained in that case, we resolve that concern by deferring to
the legislature, as the policy-making branch of government, "to decide
whether and to what extent that immunity should be waived." As important
as Hillman's and his supporting amici's policy concerns may be, they do
not justify discarding these fundamental principles of Texas law.

We in no way discount the serious policy concerns that Hillman, his
supporting amici, and today's concurring opinion express. Governmental
immunity from Sabine Pilot claims eliminates one means by which the law
could ensure that prosecutors disclose exculpatory evidence as Brady and
the Michael Morton Act require. As the amici note, the Act has enjoyed
broad, bipartisan support in the legislature, the public, and the press,
and the legislature has further strengthened the Act in more recent
legislative sessions. But to hold that governmental immunity does not
apply to Sabine Pilot claims, we must trespass across the boundary
between defining immunity's scope (a judicial task) and waiving it (a
legislative task). The distinction between scope and waiver is "a fine
one," and we must "be very hesitant to declare immunity nonexistent in
any particular case," lest we use our authority to define the scope as
"a ruse for avoiding the Legislature."

As we have repeatedly confirmed, "it is the Legislature's sole province
to waive or abrogate sovereign immunity." That the legislature has
recently revised the Michael Morton Act to strengthen its protections
illustrates its continuing awareness of the Act and its importance, as
well as its willingness to take steps to improve it. Whether waiving
immunity from Sabine Pilot claims should be the next step in that
process is up to the legislature, and we must defer to it to "protect
its policymaking function."

IIs. Conclusion

"Sovereign immunity from suit defeats a trial court's subject matter
jurisdiction." When, as here, a claim falls within the realm of
governmental immunity, courts have no jurisdiction to hear the case
unless immunity has been waived. We hold that neither Sabine Pilot nor
the Michael Morton Act waives the County's governmental immunity from
Hillman's wrongful-termination claim, and we defer to the legislature to
decide whether such a waiver would be appropriate as




a matter of public policy. We affirm the trial court's judgment granting
the County's plea to the jurisdiction and dismissing the case.

Justice GUZMAN, joined by JUSTICE LEHRMANN and JUSTICE DEVINE,
concurring.

No tyranny is more cruel than the one practiced in the shadow of the
laws and under color of justice . 119

Imagine being accused, charged, and convicted of bludgeoning your spouse
to death. You are innocent but sentenced to life in prison, effectively
orphaning your only child. Over the next 24 years, you wage an uphill
battle to prove your innocence, eventually discovering that the
prosecution held the keys to your jail cell before you ever set foot in
it. Eyewitness testimony pointing the finger at someone else and DNA
evidence that was never tested would have exculpated you if the
prosecutor had not secreted the evidence from those who were
constitutionally charged with defending you. Ultimately exonerated after
nearly a quarter century in confinement, you walk free. The
prosecutor---now a judge---is found in contempt of court for suppressing
this evidence. Small comfort. Justice delayed is justice denied. But
more than that, justice delayed is life denied.

While you were locked away for a crime you did not commit, you were
denied your unalienable rights of life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness. You lost your constitutional right to parent your child. To
have his love and companionship. To shape who he is and how he became
that way. Instead, your beautiful toddler is now a man struggling to
reconnect with a person he doesn't know, can't remember as a parent,
and spent years thinking was a vicious monster. And worse, the actual
perpetrator of this heinous crime continued to walk the streets. Free to
kill again.

Alas, this is not a hypothetical. This is the true story of Michael
Morton. Husband. Father. Supermarket manager. An ordinary Texan whose
young wife fell victim to a stranger's brutality. And while Morton
languished in jail, another young wife---Debra Baker---paid the ultimate
price at the hands of the same killer, leaving yet another young child
motherless. Foreseeable victims of overzealous prosecution.

Unfortunately, this is not an isolated incident. Official misconduct has
been a factor in more than half of the nationally reported exonerations
since 1989---nearly four score of which have occurred in Texas. Wrongful
convictions are anathema to our constitution. And suppression of
evidence is anathema to the duty of a prosecutor to seek justice.
Concealment of exculpatory evidence undermines the integrity of our
criminal justice system, which is of vital importance to every one of
us: "Society wins not only when the guilty are convicted but when
criminal trials are fair. The administration of justice suffers when any
accused is treated unfairly."

119

Charles de Secondat, Baron de Montesquieu, Considerations on the Causes
of the Greatness of the Romans and Their Decline 130 (David Lowenthal
trans., Hackett Pub. Co., 1999) (1965).




The tragic story of Michael Morton and Debra Baker compelled the
Legislature to take affirmative steps to prevent wrongful convictions
due to prosecutorial misconduct. In the legislative session following
Morton's exoneration, the Texas Legislature unanimously passed the
Michael Morton Act. The Morton Act extends, but has not altered,
prosecutors' longstanding obligation under Brady to disclose exculpatory
evidence in the prosecution's possession. Before the Morton Act,
prosecutors had a constitutional duty under Brady to disclose all
evidence that might exonerate the defendant, but the defense had very
limited pretrial discovery rights. Under the Morton Act, if the defense
requests discovery, the prosecution is under a statutory duty to
continually disclose exculpatory, mitigating, or impeachment evidence.
The Act is an important legislative step towards ensuring Brady
compliance and bolstering the integrity of the criminal justice system.

As this case sadly demonstrates, however, unacceptable gaps remain. When
one good man refuses to stay silent, refuses to "just follow orders,"
and refuses to do the wrong thing under the misguided belief that it's
for the greater good, he should not lose his job. While Hillman might
have had a viable ultra vires claim, had he chosen to pursue one, the
limited remedies available under that theory are manifestly inadequate
to ensure accountability in matters of the highest constitutional
dimension. The law must---but currently does not---afford a remedy that
advances the Legislature's calculated efforts to secure our
constitutional guarantees.

I

Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere , 120

In 2013, Eric Hillman, an assistant district attorney in Nueces County,
was assigned to prosecute David Sims for intoxication assault and
leaving the scene of an accident. Hillman performed a diligent
independent investigation and located a witness who was not listed in
the police report. The witness told Hillman she was with Sims the entire
evening, he had only consumed two alcoholic beverages, and he was not
intoxicated when the accident occurred.

Hillman immediately informed his supervisor that a new witness with
exculpatory testimony had been located and he would be releasing that
information to Sims's defense counsel. The supervisor demanded Hillman
withhold the information, assuring him it was proper to do so.

Unconvinced, Hillman conducted an independent investigation of his
ethical obligations, consulting with both the Texas Center for Legal
Ethics and the State Bar of Texas Ethics Hotline. Both admonished him to
disclose the information to defense counsel. Hillman therefore reported
to his supervisor that he intended to turn over the evidence to the
defense because withholding it would be unethical. According to Hillman,
his supervisor responded, "Eric, you need to decide if you want to be a
prosecutor or a defense attorney." A week after Hillman announced his
intention to disclose the information, former District Attorney Mark
Skurka summarily terminated Hillman's employment for refusing to
"follow instructions."

Martin Luther King, Jr., Letter from Birmingham Jail (Apr. 16, 1963).




Hillman sued the County, District Attorney Skurka, and the District
Attorney's Office for wrongful termination, but his case was dismissed
on a plea to the jurisdiction.

I concur in today's judgment and join in much of the Court's reasoning.
The gravamen of this case is governmental immunity: whether the County
is immune from a wrongful-termination suit alleging a prosecutor was
fired because he insisted on doing what the law requires. Under our
immunity jurisprudence, this case is fairly straightforward, and the
Court's analysis is sound. First, we did not abrogate governmental
immunity in Sabine Pilot. The employer in that case was not a
governmental entity, so the issue of governmental immunity was not
before us and cannot be inferred sub silentio. Second, immunity has not
been waived. We defer to the Legislature to waive immunity, and I agree
with the Court that the Morton Act contains no such waiver because no
"clear and unambiguous language" expresses that intent. Third, we should
not abrogate immunity here. Although we have the power to abrogate
immunity, we have rarely done so, and even then we limited it to offset
claims rather than allowing unlimited recovery of monetary damages.
Sanctioning the recovery of monetary damages---without any legislatively
considered limitations like those in the Texas Tort Claims Act---would
have significant public-fisc implications that raise
separation-of-powers concerns. Finally, though Hillman arguably has a
viable ultra vires claim, he has disclaimed any intent to assert one.
Accordingly, I agree with the Court that the County is immune from suit
in this case and that remand is not appropriate. I write separately,
however, to highlight a lacuna in the legislative scheme that neuters
the Legislature's efforts to forestall prosecutorial misconduct that
could lead to wrongful convictions.

If impunity is not demolished, all efforts to bring an end to corruption
are in vain. m

Taking Hillman's account as true, he was fired for endeavoring to
fulfill constitutional and statutory obligations imposed on all
prosecutors. By any measure of law and morality in a civilized country,
that is wrongful termination. Those we entrust to pursue justice should
not be put to the Hobson's choice of earning a living or doing the right
thing. Cloaking governmental employers with absolute immunity in such
circumstances erodes public confidence in the criminal justice system
and undermines concerted legislative efforts to reform that system. By
and large, prosecutors are honorable public servants committed to
fairness in the administration of justice, but when unlawful practices
are tolerated, encouraged, or rewarded with career advantages, others
may be enticed to cross the line or may be cowed by consequences visited
on those who resist. It's fair to assume that the Legislature did not
envision such a consequence when enacting the Morton Act without
adopting measures to ensure prosecutors could comply with the Act
without losing their jobs. In light of the underbelly this case exposes,
it would be appropriate for the Legislature to do so now.

Rigoberta Menchu Turn, The Plague of Corruption: Overcoming Impunity and
Injustice, in GLOBAL CORRUPTION REPORT 2001, at 155 (Robin Hodess,
Jessie Banfield &Toby Wolfe eds., Transparency Int'l 2001).




Both Brady and the Morton Act obligate prosecutors to disclose certain
types of evidence to the defense as a function of due process and to
stave off wrongful convictions by thwarting pernicious prosecutorial
practices. Wrongful convictions, as numerous studies have shown, come at
a significant cost to our society. Financial burdens on the taxpayers
accumulate through "an appeal, an appellate reversal, a retrial,
investigational efforts to trace the real offender, possible civil
lawsuits, and compensatory payments." While we can calculate economic
losses from wrongful convictions---for example, the state has paid more
than $93 million in compensation to 101 men and women who were
wrongfully sent to prison over the past 25 years---the true cost is
immeasurable. There is simply no way to restore lost time, no reset
button that erases the financial and emotional consequences to the
wrongfully incarcerated and their families.

On the other side of the coin, for every innocent person that sits in
jail, a criminal roams free. Free to commit more crimes. If
DNA-exoneration cases are any kind of indicator, the societal
consequences of convicting the wrong person---however it happens---are
devastating. For example, out of 325 DNA-exoneration cases from 1989 to
2014, 68 of the true perpetrators later committed an additional 142
violent crimes---including 77 rapes, 34 homicides, and 31 other violent
crimes.

With such grave consequences, the best defense is a good offense. The
Morton Act is a strong foundation, but more is required to ensure that
those wielding power use it as the founders intended. Prosecutors are on
the forefront of avoiding wrongful convictions and ameliorating the
ensuing societal costs. Based on data compiled by the National Registry
of Exonerations, official misconduct ranks second among the top five
factors contributing to exonerations, leading to over half of the 2,401
(and counting) exonerations since 1989. The most common type of official
misconduct involves concealing exculpatory evidence.

While multiple external forces are aimed at ensuring accountability for
misconduct---including professional discipline, potential criminal
charges, and loss of elected office---this case epitomizes the limits of
existing accountability measures. Research shows professional discipline
and criminal charges are rarely imposed for prosecutorial misconduct.
Even in the rare instances when misconduct is uncovered, it usually does
not surface until after an innocent person has stayed in prison for
years, presenting time-based challenges to any investigation or
prosecution of wrongdoing. The possibility of some adverse consequence
in some future public election has even less force as a deterrent and,
more importantly, does absolutely nothing to alleviate irreparable harm
resulting from the wrong.

Brady violations are difficult to uncover because, by definition, they
involve concealment of evidence in the prosecution's exclusive
possession and control. Indeed, exposure of Brady violations generally
requires the prosecution's own admission, some "chance discovery" by the
defense team, or "dumb luck." The most effective way to combat
prosecutorial misconduct is to provide a disincentive extrinsic to an
individual prosecutor's own moral compass. "Ironically, the only one who
can act as a check on the prosecution is the prosecution itself." This
case places the internal dynamics within the prosecutor's office under a
microscope. Although many district




attorney's offices have implemented internal guidance or best practices,
when the pressure to withhold evidence comes from the top, internal
guidelines are at best a window dressing. Under circumstances like those
alleged here, it is imperative that honest prosecutors not be punished.

Absent legislative action, the best someone in Hillman's position could
hope for is to seek prospective equitable relief under an ultra vires
theory. An ultra vires claim can be brought against a state official if
the officer "acted without legal authority." Although a district
attorney has discretion to fire subordinates, one could argue there is
no discretion to undertake such an action if it "conflicts with the
law." If Hillman had not opposed consideration of his claims under an
ultra vires theory, I would remand in the interest of justice to allow
him to pursue that claim.

However, as a policy matter, I am dubious that a remedy limited to
prospective equitable relief is strong enough to deter the egregious
conduct alleged here. To be effective, the remedy must be proportional
to the wrong. To my mind, the threat of other consequences, including
monetary relief, would provide the external pressure required to
motivate vigilance and self-policing. The Legislature is better suited,
and constitutionally constituted, to weigh the policy interests that
bear on whether to waive immunity (and to what extent), but as to that
matter, this case makes painfully clear that what's past is prologue.
---
lang: en
title: "Questions:"
---

# Questions:

1. Hillman was the first prosecutor represented by the Innocence
Project , in recognition of his commitment to doing justice. Hillman's
action was also covered by the ABA Journal , the Houston Chronicle , the
Austin Statesman , the Associated Press , and the San Francisco
Chronicle , among others. You can watch a video of the oral argument in
Hillman v. Nueces County (2018) here .

1. Do you agree with the court's conclusion that sovereign immunity
bars Hillman's action? Should the court have construed sovereign
immunity differently? Should Hillman have a claim against Skurka? Would
absolute prosecutorial immunity bar any such claim? Should it?

1. Under the circumstances, what should Hillman have done? Did he have
any other options?
---
lang: en
title: "Further Reading:"
---

# Further Reading:

- Bennett L. Gershman, The Prosecutor's Duty of Silence, 79 Alb. L. Rev.
1183 (2016)
---
lang: en
title: "Further Viewing & Listening:"
---

# Further Viewing & Listening:

- Last Week Tonight With John Oliver: Prosecutors (2018)

- Carissa Byrne Hessick on the Myth of Common Law Crimes, Ipse Dixit,
January 9, 2019

- Rachel Barkow on Criminal Justice Reform, February 4, 2019

- Maybell Romero on Profit-Driven Prosecution, February 28, 2019



---
lang: en
title: "7.5: Judicial Recusal & Misconduct"
---

# 7.5: Judicial Recusal & Misconduct

Good morning Judge, why do you look so mean? Sorry Mr. Judge, what can
the charges be? If there's been trouble I will plead not guilty. It must
be someone else, you know it can't be me. 122

"If I had me job to pick out, " said Mr. Dooley, "I'd be a judge. I've
looked over all th' others an' that's th' on'y wan that suits. I have
th'judicyal timperamint. I hate wurruk." 123

Judges must be neutral and impartial at all times. Or at least, they
must appear to be neutral and impartial. Accordingly, judicial conduct
is regulated by a congeries of constitutional, statutory, and
administrative rules intended to ensure neutrality and impartiality.

Among other things, due process requires judges to recuse themselves to
avoid conflicts of interest, and may require disqualification if a judge
fails to recuse. Federal law prohibits judges from accepting or
soliciting bribes. 124 But it also requires judges to recuse themselves
whenever their impartiality could reasonably be questioned. 125 The
Judicial Conduct and Disability Act of 1980 authorizes complaints
alleging that a federal judge "has engaged in conduct prejudicial to the
effective and expeditious administration of the business of the courts"
or "is unable to discharge all the duties of office by reason of mental
or physical disability." 126 And the Rules for Judicial-Conduct and
Judicial-Disability Proceedings govern misconduct and disability
proceedings against federal judges under the Act. 127 States may have
similar statutory and administrative provisions.

Finally, federal and state judicial codes of conduct comprehensively
regulate judges. In 1924, the ABA first created and approved its Canons
of Judicial Conduct, which were revised in 1972, 1990, and 2007. The ABA
canons are currently titled the Model Code of Judicial Conduct , and
consist of both aspirational principles and specific rules intended to
realize those principles. The federal judiciary has adopted the Code of
Conduct for United States Judges , which includes the ethical canons
that apply to federal judges and provides guidance on their performance
of official duties and engagement in a variety of outside activities.
Most states also have judicial commissions, which are empowered to
investigate violations of judicial ethics.
---
lang: en
title: Judicial Recusal
---

# Judicial Recusal

Stop eatin' that fudge, cause here comes the judge. Don't nobody buzz,
cause here comes the judge. Judge Shorty is presidin' today, and he
don't take no stuff from nobody, no kind of way. 128

122

Wynonie Harris, Good Morning Judge (1952).

123

Finley Peter Dunne, Observations by Mr. Dooley (1902).

124 18 U.S.C. §203(a)(1)(B) .

125 28 U.S.C. § 455 .

126 28 U.S. Code §§ 351-64.

127

Guide to Judiciary Policy, Vol. 2: Ethics and Judicial Conduct, Pt. E:
Judicial Conduct and Disability

Act and Related Materials, Ch. 3: Rules for Judicial-Conduct and
Judicial-Disability Proceedings.

128 Shorty Long, Here Comes the Judge (1968).



---
lang: en
title: "Model Code of Judicial Conduct: Canon 1"
---

# Model Code of Judicial Conduct: Canon 1

A judge shall uphold and promote the independence, integrity, and
impartiality of the judiciary, and shall avoid impropriety and the
appearance of impropriety.
---
lang: en
title: "Model Rule 1.2: Promoting Confidence in the Judiciary"
---

# Model Rule 1.2: Promoting Confidence in the Judiciary

A judge shall act at all times in a manner that promotes public
confidence in the independence, integrity, and impartiality of the
judiciary, and shall avoid impropriety and the appearance of
impropriety.
---
lang: en
title: "Model Rule 1.2: Comments"
---

# Model Rule 1.2: Comments

1. Public confidence in the judiciary is eroded by improper conduct and
conduct that creates the appearance of impropriety. This principle
applies to both the professional and personal conduct of a judge.

1. A judge should expect to be the subject of public scrutiny that
might be viewed as burdensome if applied to other citizens, and must
accept the restrictions imposed by the Code.

1. Conduct that compromises or appears to compromise the independence,
integrity, and impartiality of a judge undermines public confidence in
the judiciary. Because it is not practicable to list all such conduct,
the Rule is necessarily cast in general terms.

1. Actual improprieties include violations of law, court rules or
provisions of this Code. The test for appearance of impropriety is
whether the conduct would create in reasonable minds a perception that
the judge violated this Code or engaged in other conduct that reflects
adversely on the judge's honesty, impartiality, temperament, or fitness
to serve as a judge.




::: {style="width: 45.13725490196078%;"}
![Picture #71](../assets/img/img_0071.png)
:::
---
lang: en
title: RICHARD MAYBERRY
---

# RICHARD MAYBERRY

## . landmark case

a

The Philadelphia Inquirer, Jan. 11, 1972, at 1

Mayberry v. Pennsylvania, 400 U.S. 455 (1971)

Summary: Mayberry and two co-defendants were tried in state court for an
attempted prison break. They were appointed counsel, but represented by
Mayberry. During the trial, Mayberry repeatedly insulted the judge and
questioned his impartiality. The jury

::: {style="width: 49.450980392156865%;"}
![Picture #72](../assets/img/img_0072.png)
:::




found the defendants guilty, but before imposing the sentence, the judge
pronounced Mayberry guilty of 11 counts of criminal contempt, and
sentenced him to 11 to 22 years. The Supreme Court of Pennsylvania
affirmed the contempt charges, but the Supreme Court granted Mayberry's
pro se petition for certiorari and reversed, holding that due process
entitles a defendant in a criminal contempt proceeding to a trial before
a different judge.

MR. JUSTICE DOUGLAS delivered the opinion of the Court.

Petitioner and two codefendants were tried in a state court for prison
breach and holding hostages in a penal institution. While they had
appointed counsel as advisers, they represented themselves. The trial
ended with a jury verdict of guilty of both charges on the 21st day,
which was a Friday. The defendants were brought in for sentencing on the
following Monday. Before imposing sentence on the verdicts the judge
pronounced them guilty of criminal contempt. He found that petitioner
had committed one or more contempts on 11 of the 21 days of trial and
sentenced him to not less than one nor more than two years for each of
the 11 contempts or a total of 11 to 22 years.

The Supreme Court of Pennsylvania affirmed by a divided vote. The case
is here on a petition for writ of certiorari.

Petitioner's conduct at the trial comes as a shock to those raised in
the Western tradition that considers a courtroom a hallowed place of
quiet dignity as far removed as possible from the emotions of the
street.

On the first day of the trial petitioner came to the sidebar to make
suggestions and obtain rulings on trial procedures. Petitioner said: "It
seems like the court has the intentions of railroading us" and moved to
disqualify the judge. The motion was denied. Petitioner's other motions,
including his request that the deputy sheriffs in the courtroom be
dressed as civilians, were also denied. Then came the following
colloquy:

Mr. Mayberry: I would like to have a fair trial of this case and like to
be granted a fair trial under the Sixth Amendment.

The Court: You will get a fair trial.

Mr. Mayberry: It doesn't appear that I am going to get one the way you
are overruling all our motions and that, and being like a hatchet man
for the State.

The Court: This side bar is over.

Mr. Mayberry: Wait a minute, Your Honor.

The Court: It is over.

Mr. Mayberry: You dirty sonofabitch."

The second episode took place on the eighth day of the trial. A
co-defendant was crossexamining a prison guard and the court sustained
objections to certain questions:




Mr. Codispoti: Are you trying to protect the prison authorities, Your
Honor? Is that your reason?

The Court: You are out of order, Mr. Codispoti. I don't want any
outbursts like that again. This is a court of justice. You don't know
how to ask questions.

Mr. Mayberry: Possibly Your Honor doesn't know how to rule on them.

The Court: You keep quiet.

Mr. Mayberry: You ought to be Gilbert and Sullivan the way you sustain
the district attorney every time he objects to the questions.

The Court: Are you through? When your time comes you can ask questions
and not make speeches.

The next charge stemmed from the examination of an inmate about a riot
in prison in which petitioner apparently was implicated. There were many
questions asked and many objections sustained. At one point the
following outburst occurred:

Mr. Mayberry: Now, I'm going to produce my defense in this case and not
be railroaded into any life sentence by any dirty, tyrannical old dog
like yourself.

The Court: You may proceed with your questioning, Mr. Mayberry.

The fourth charge grew out of an examination of another defense witness:

By Mr. Mayberry:

Q. I ask you, Mr. Nardi, is that area, the handball court, is it open to
any prisoner who wants to play handball, who cares to go to that area to
play handball?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you understand the prior question when I asked you if it was
freely open and accessible area?

The Court: He answered your question. Let's go on.

Mr. Mayberry: I am asking him now if he understands...

The Court: He answered it. Now, let's go on.

Mr. Mayberry: I ask Your Honor to keep your mouth shut while I'm
questioning my own witness. Will you do that for me?

The Court: I wish you would do the same. Proceed with your questioning.

The fifth charge relates to a protest which the defendants made that at
the end of each trial day they were denied access to their legal
documents---a condition which the trial judge shortly remedied. The
following ensued:

Mr. Mayberry: You're a judge first. What are you working for? The prison
authorities, you bum?

Mr. Livingston: I have a motion pending before Your Honor.

The Court: I would suggess...

Mr. Mayberry: Go to hell. I don't give a good God damn what you suggest,
you stumbling dog.




Meanwhile one defendant told the judge if he did not get access to his
papers at night he'd "blow your head off." Another defendant said he
would not sit still and be "kowtowed and be railroaded into a life
imprisonment." Then the following transpired:

Mr. Mayberry: You started all this bullshit in the beginning.

The Court: You keep quiet.

Mr. Mayberry: Wait a minute.

The Court: You keep quiet.

Mr. Mayberry: I am my own counsel.

The Court: You keep quiet.

Mr. Mayberry. Are you going to gag me?

The Court: Take these prisoners out of here. We will take a ten minute
recess, members of the jury.

The sixth episode happened when two of the defendants wanted to have
some time to talk to a witness whom they had called. The two of them had
had a heated exchange with the judge when the following happened:

Mr. Mayberry: Just one moment, Your Honor.

The Court: This is not your witness, Mr. Mayberry. Keep quiet.

Mr. Mayberry: Oh, yes, he is my witness, too. He is my witness, also.
Now, we are at the penitentiary and in seclusion. We can't talk to any
of our witnesses prior to putting them on the stand like the District
Attorney obviously has the opportunity, and as he obviously made use of
the opportunity to talk to his witnesses. Nos...

The Court: Now, I have ruled, Mr. Mayberry.

Mr. Mayberry: I don't care what you ruled. That is unimportant. The fact
is...

The Court: You will remain quiet, sir, and finish the examination of
this witness.

Mr. Mayberry: No, I won't be quiet while you try to deny me the right to
a fair trial. The only way I will be quiet is if you have me gagged.
Now, if you want to do that, that is up to you; but in the meantime I am
going to say what I have to say. Now, we have the right to speak to our
witnesses prior to putting them on the stand. This is an accepted fact
of law. It is nothing new or unusual. Now, you are going to try to force
us to have our witness testify to facts that he has only a hazy
recollection of that happened back in 1965. Now, I believe we have the
right to confer with our witness prior to putting him on the stand.

The Court: Are you finished?

Mr. Mayberry: I am finished.

The Court: Proceed with your examination.

The seventh charge grew out of an examination of a codefendant by
petitioner. The following outburst took place:

By Mr. Mayberry:




Q. No. Don't state a conclusion because Gilbert is going to object and
Sullivan will sustain. Give me facts. What leads you to say that?

Later petitioner said:

Mr. Mayberry: My witness isn't being in an inquisition, you know. This
isn't the Spanish Inquisition.

Following other exchanges with the court, petitioner said:

Mr. Mayberry: Now, just what do you call proper? I have asked questions,
numerous questions and everyone you said is improper. I have asked
questions that my adviser has given me, and I have repeated these
questions verbatim as they came out of my adviser's mouth, and you said
they are improper. Now just what do you consider proper? The Court: I am
not here to educate you, Mr. Mayberry.

Mr. Mayberry: No. I know you are not. But you're not here to railroad
me into no life bit, either.

Mr. Codispoti: To protect the recors...

The Court: Do you have any other questions to ask this witness?

Mr. Mayberry: You need to have some kind of psychiatric treatment, I
think. You're some kind of a nut. I know you're trying to do a good
job for that Warden Maroney back there, but let's keep it looking
decent anyway, you know. Don't make it so obvious, Your Honor.

A codefendant was removed from the courtroom and when he returned
petitioner asked for a severance.

Mr. Mayberry: I have to ask for a severance.

The Court: I have heard that before. It is denied again. Let's go on.

(Exception noted.)

Mr. Mayberry: This is the craziest trial I have ever seen.

The Court: You may call your next witness, Mr. Mayberry.

Petitioner wanted to call witnesses from the penitentiary whose names
had not been submitted earlier and for whom no subpoenas were issued.
The court restricted the witnesses to the list of those subpoenaed:

Mr. Mayberry: Before I get to that I wish to have a ruling, and I don't
care if it is contempt or whatever you want to call it, but I want a
ruling for the record that I am being denied these witnesses that I
asked for months before this trial ever began.

The ninth charge arose out of a ruling by the court on a question
concerning the availability of tools to prisoners in their cells.




The Court: I have ruled on that, Mr. Mayberry. Now proceed with your
questioning, and don't argue.

Mr. Mayberry: You're arguing. I'm not arguing, not arguing with fools.

The court near the end of the trial had petitioner ejected from the
courtroom several times. The contempt charge was phrased as follows by
the court:

On December 7, 1966, you have created a despicable scene in refusing to
continue calling your witnesses and in creating such consternation and
uproar as to cause a termination of the trial.

As the court prepared to charge the jury, petitioner said:

Before Your Honor begins the charge to the jury defendant Mayberry
wishes to place his objection on the record to the charge and to the
whole proceedings from now on, and he wishes to make it known to the
Court now that he has no intention of remaining silent while the Court
charges the jury, and that he is going to continually object to the
charge of the Court to the jury throughout the entire charge, and he is
not going to remain silent. He is going to disrupt the proceedings
verbally throughout the entire charge of the Court, and also he is going
to be objecting to being forced to terminate his defense before he was
finished.

The court thereupon had petitioner removed from the courtroom and later
returned gagged. But petitioner caused such a commotion under gag that
the court had him removed to an adjacent room where a loudspeaker system
made the courtroom proceedings audible. The court phrased this contempt
charge as follows:

On December 9, 1966, you have constantly, boisterously, and insolently
interrupted the Court during its attempts to charge the jury, thereby
creating an atmosphere of utter confusion and chaos.

These brazen efforts to denounce, insult, and slander the court and to
paralyze the trial are at war with the concept of justice under law.
Laymen, foolishly trying to defend themselves, may understandably create
awkward and embarrassing scenes. Yet that is not the character of the
record revealed here. We have here downright insults of a trial judge,
and tactics taken from street brawls and transported to the courtroom.
This is conduct not "befitting an American courtroom," and criminal
contempt is one appropriate remedy.

As these separate acts or outbursts took place, the arsenal of authority
described in Allen was available to the trial judge to keep order in the
courtroom. He could, with propriety, have instantly acted, holding
petitioner in contempt, or excluding him from the courtroom, or
otherwise insulating his vulgarity from the courtroom. The Court noted
in Sacher v. United States, that, while instant action may be taken
against a lawyer who is guilty of contempt, to




pronounce him guilty of contempt is "not unlikely to prejudice his
client." Those considerations are not pertinent here where petitioner
undertook to represent himself. In Sacher the trial judge waited until
the end of the trial to impose punishment for contempt, the Court
saying:

If we were to hold that summary punishment can be imposed only instantly
upon the event, it would be an incentive to pronounce, while smarting
under the irritation of the contemptuous act, what should be a
well-considered judgment. We think it less likely that unfair
condemnation of counsel will occur if the more deliberate course be
permitted.

Generalizations are difficult. Instant treatment of contempt where
lawyers are involved may greatly prejudice their clients but it may be
the only wise course where others are involved. Moreover, we do not say
that the more vicious the attack on the judge the less qualified he is
to act. A judge cannot be driven out of a case. Where, however, he does
not act the instant the contempt is committed, but waits until the end
of the trial, on balance, it is generally wise where the marks of the
unseemly conduct have left personal stings to ask a fellow judge to take
his place. What Chief Justice Taft said in Cooke v. United States is
relevant here:

The power of contempt which a judge must have and exercise in protecting
the due and orderly administration of justice and in maintaining the
authority and dignity of the court is most important and indispensable.
But its exercise is a delicate one and care is needed to avoid arbitrary
or oppressive conclusions. This rule of caution is more mandatory where
the contempt charged has in it the element of personal criticism or
attack upon the judge. The judge must banish the slightest personal
impulse to reprisal, but he should not bend backward and injure the
authority of the court by too great leniency. The substitution of
another judge would avoid either tendency but it is not always possible.
Of course where acts of contempt are palpably aggravated by a personal
attack upon the judge in order to drive the judge out of the case for
ulterior reasons, the scheme should not be permitted to succeed. But
attempts of this kind are rare. All of such cases, however, present
difficult questions for the judge. All we can say upon the whole matter
is that where conditions do not make it impracticable, or where the
delay may not injure public or private right, a judge called upon to act
in a case of contempt by personal attack upon him, may, without
flinching from his duty, properly ask that one of his fellow judges take
his place.

We conclude that that course should have been followed here, as marked
personal feelings were present on both sides.

Whether the trial be federal or state, the concern of due process is
with the fair administration of justice. At times a judge has not been
the image of "the impersonal authority of law," but has become so
"personally embroiled" with a lawyer in the trial as to make the judge
unfit to sit in judgment on the contempt charge.




"The vital point is that in sitting in judgment on such a misbehaving
lawyer the judge should not himself give vent to personal spleen or
respond to a personal grievance. These are subtle matters, for they
concern the ingredients of what constitutes justice. Therefore, justice
must satisfy the appearance of justice."

Offutt does not fit this case, for the state judge in the instant
controversy was not an activist seeking combat. Rather, he was the
target of petitioner's insolence. Yet a judge, vilified as was this
Pennsylvania judge, necessarily becomes embroiled in a running, bitter
controversy. No one so cruelly slandered is likely to maintain that calm
detachment necessary for fair adjudication. In re Murchison was a case
where a judge acted under state law as a one-man grand jury and later
tried witnesses for contempt who refused to answer questions propounded
by the "judge-grand jury." We held that since the judge who sat as a
one-man grand jury was part of the accusatory process he "cannot be, in
the very nature of things, wholly disinterested in the conviction or
acquittal of those accused." "Fair trials are too important a part of
our free society to let prosecuting judges be trial judges of the
charges they prefer."

It is, of course, not every attack on a judge that disqualifies him from
sitting. In Ungar v. Sarafite , we ruled that a lawyer's challenge,
though "disruptive, recalcitrant and disagreeable commentary," was still
not "an insulting attack upon the integrity of the judge carrying such
potential for bias as to require disqualification." Many of the words
leveled at the judge in the instant case were highly personal
aspersions, even "fighting words"---''dirty sonofabitch," "dirty
tyrannical old dog," "stumbling dog," and "fool." He was charged with
running a Spanish Inquisition and told to "Go to hell" and "Keep your
mouth shut." Insults of that kind are apt to strike "at the most
vulnerable and human qualities of a judge's temperament."

Our conclusion is that by reason of the Due Process Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment a defendant in criminal contempt proceedings should
be given a public trial before a judge other than the one reviled by the
contemnor. In the present case that requirement can be satisfied only if
the judgment of contempt is vacated so that on remand another judge, not
bearing the sting of these slanderous remarks and having the impersonal
authority of the law, sits in judgment on the conduct of petitioner as
shown by the record.




::: {style="width: 58.82352941176471%;"}
![Picture #73](../assets/img/img_0073.png)
:::
---
lang: en
title: CONVICT GOES TO COURT IN STRAITJACKET
---

# CONVICT GOES TO COURT IN STRAITJACKET

## Richard Mayberry restrained after outburst.---(AP)

I

Oakland Tribune, Dec. 10, 1966, at 2

Questions:

1. On June 27, 1965, Richard O.J. Mayberry, Dominick Codispopi, and
Herbert Langes tried to escape from Western State Penitentiary in
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Mayberry was originally convicted of armed
robbery in 1957, and was serving 3.5 to 10 years for a

::: {style="width: 59.01960784313726%;"}
![Picture #74](../assets/img/img_0074.png)
:::




previous escape attempt in 1961. Mayberry, Codispoti, and Langes armed
themselves with zip guns and homemade bombs, and took two guards hostage
in the prison hospital. They surrendered after 90 minutes, when the
state police bombarded them with tear gas, and released their hostages
unharmed. Mayberry's hand was injured when one of the bombs exploded
while he was throwing it. Mayberry became a legendary "jailhouse
lawyer." Two of his petitions for certiorari were accepted by the
Supreme Court, and several of the actions he filed led to significant
prison reform. Today,

Mayberry is still incarcerated in the Pennsylvania State Correctional
Institution at Huntingdon.

1. Why did the Court hold that due process required the judge to recuse
himself from deciding the criminal contempt charges? Did Mayberry
receive any due process on those charges?

1. Mayberry, Codispoti, and Langes were all charged with contempt. On
remand, all three were convicted of criminal contempt of court in
non-jury trials, and sentenced to multiple consecutive terms, amounting
to about 3 years. The Pennsylvania Supreme Court affirmed, but the
Supreme Court granted certiorari and reversed, holding that criminal
defendants in a contempt proceeding are entitled to a jury trial if the
cumulative sentence could exceed 6 months. Codispoti v. Pennsylvania,
418 U.S. 506 (1974) .

::: {style="width: 17.84313725490196%;"}
![Picture #75](../assets/img/img_0075.png)
:::

Richard Mayberry (2018)




::: {style="width: 40.11764705882353%;"}
![Picture #76](../assets/img/img_0076.png)
:::

Zip gun used in prison escape attempt

Further Reading:

- Steven R. Jenkins, Mayberry v. Pennsylvania: Due Process Limitation in
Summary

Punishments for Contempt of Court, 25 Sw L.J. 805 (1971)

- Contempt: Mayberry v. Pennsylvania, 400 U.S. 455 (1971), 62 J. Crim.
L. Criminology &

Police Sci. 525 (1971)

Caperton v. A.T. Massey Coal Co., Inc., 556 U.S. 868 (2009)

Summary: In 2002, Caperton won a business tort action against Massey and
Blankenship, and received a $50 million damages award, which Massey and
Blankenship appealed. In the meantime, Benjamin ran for a seat on the
Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia. Blankenship spent about $3
million campaigning for Benjamin. When Benjamin won, Caperton filed a
motion to disqualify Benjamin from the appeal, which Benjamin denied.
The Supreme Court of Appeals granted the appeal and reversed. Benjamin
also declined to recuse on rehearing, and the court once again reversed.
The Supreme Court granted certiorari and reversed, holding that due
process requires recusal when the facts create an objective appearance
of impropriety. The dissent argued that the standard adopted by the
majority was arbitrary and unworkable.

Justice KENNEDY delivered the opinion of the Court.

In this case the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia reversed a
trial court judgment, which had entered a jury verdict of $50 million.
Five justices heard the case, and the vote to reverse was 3 to 2. The
question presented is whether the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment was violated when one of the justices in the majority denied a
recusal motion. The basis for the motion was that the justice had
received campaign contributions in an

::: {style="width: 39.96078431372549%;"}
![Picture #77](../assets/img/img_0077.png)
:::




extraordinary amount from, and through the efforts of, the board
chairman and principal officer of the corporation found liable for the
damages.

Under our precedents there are objective standards that require recusal
when "the probability of actual bias on the part of the judge or
decisionmaker is too high to be constitutionally tolerable." Applying
those precedents, we find that, in all the circumstances of this case,
due process requires recusal.

I

In August 2002 a West Virginia jury returned a verdict that found
respondents A.T. Massey Coal Co. and its affiliates liable for
fraudulent misrepresentation, concealment, and tortious interference
with existing contractual relations. The jury awarded petitioners Hugh
Caperton, Harman Development Corp., Harman Mining Corp., and Sovereign
Coal Sales the sum of $50 million in compensatory and punitive damages.

In June 2004 the state trial court denied Massey's post-trial motions
challenging the verdict and the damages award, finding that Massey
"intentionally acted in utter disregard of Caperton's rights and
ultimately destroyed Caperton's businesses because, after conducting
cost-benefit analyses, Massey concluded it was in its financial interest
to do so." In March 2005 the trial court denied Massey's motion for
judgment as a matter of law.

Don Blankenship is Massey's chairman, chief executive officer, and
president. After the verdict but before the appeal, West Virginia held
its 2004 judicial elections. Knowing the Supreme Court of Appeals of
West Virginia would consider the appeal in the case, Blankenship decided
to support an attorney who sought to replace Justice McGraw. Justice
McGraw was a candidate for reelection to that court. The attorney who
sought to replace him was Brent Benjamin.

In addition to contributing the $1,000 statutory maximum to Benjamin's
campaign committee, Blankenship donated almost $2.5 million to "And For
The Sake Of The Kids." The § 527 organization opposed McGraw and
supported Benjamin. Blankenship's donations accounted for more than
two-thirds of the total funds it raised. This was not all. Blankenship
spent, in addition, just over $500,000 on independent
expenditures---for direct mailings and letters soliciting donations as
well as television and newspaper advertisements---"to support Brent
Benjamin."

To provide some perspective, Blankenship's $3 million in contributions
were more than the total amount spent by all other Benjamin supporters
and three times the amount spent by Benjamin's own committee. Caperton
contends that Blankenship spent $1 million more than the total amount
spent by the campaign committees of both candidates combined.

Benjamin won. He received 382,036 votes (53.3%), and McGraw received
334,301 votes (46.7%).




In October 2005, before Massey filed its petition for appeal in West
Virginia's highest court, Caperton moved to disqualify now-Justice
Benjamin under the Due Process Clause and the West Virginia Code of
Judicial Conduct, based on the conflict caused by Blankenship's campaign
involvement. Justice Benjamin denied the motion in April 2006. He
indicated that he "carefully considered the bases and accompanying
exhibits proffered by the movants." But he found "no objective
information to show that this Justice has a bias for or against any
litigant, that this Justice has prejudged the matters which comprise
this litigation, or that this Justice will be anything but fair and
impartial." In December 2006 Massey filed its petition for appeal to
challenge the adverse jury verdict. The West Virginia Supreme Court of
Appeals granted review.

In November 2007 that court reversed the $50 million verdict against
Massey. The majority opinion, authored by then-Chief Justice Davis and
joined by Justices Benjamin and Maynard, found that "Massey's conduct
warranted the type of judgment rendered in this case." It reversed,
nevertheless, based on two independent grounds---first, that a
forum-selection clause contained in a contract to which Massey was not a
party barred the suit in West Virginia, and, second, that res judicata
barred the suit due to an out-of-state judgment to which Massey was not
a party. Justice Starcher dissented, stating that the "majority's
opinion is morally and legally wrong." Justice Albright also dissented,
accusing the majority of "misapplying the law and introducing sweeping
'new law' into our jurisprudence that may well come back to haunt us."

Caperton sought rehearing, and the parties moved for disqualification of
three of the five justices who decided the appeal. Photos had surfaced
of Justice Maynard vacationing with Blankenship in the French Riviera
while the case was pending. Justice Maynard granted Caperton's recusal
motion. On the other side Justice Starcher granted Massey's recusal
motion, apparently based on his public criticism of Blankenship's role
in the 2004 elections. In his recusal memorandum Justice Starcher urged
Justice Benjamin to recuse himself as well. He noted that "Blankenship's
bestowal of his personal wealth, political tactics, and 'friendship'
have created a cancer in the affairs of this Court." Justice Benjamin
declined Justice Starcher's suggestion and denied Caperton's recusal
motion.

The court granted rehearing. Justice Benjamin, now in the capacity of
acting chief justice, selected Judges Cookman and Fox to replace the
recused justices. Caperton moved a third time for disqualification,
arguing that Justice Benjamin had failed to apply the correct standard
under West Virginia law---i.e., whether "a reasonable and prudent
person, knowing these objective facts, would harbor doubts about Justice
Benjamin's ability to be fair and impartial." Caperton also included the
results of a public opinion poll, which indicated that over 67% of West
Virginians doubted Justice Benjamin would be fair and impartial. Justice
Benjamin again refused to withdraw, noting that the "push poll" was
"neither credible nor sufficiently reliable to serve as the basis for an
elected judge's disqualification."

In April 2008 a divided court again reversed the jury verdict, and again
it was a 3-to-2 decision. Justice Davis filed a modified version of her
prior opinion, repeating the two earlier holdings.

She was joined by Justice Benjamin and Judge Fox. Justice Albright,
joined by Judge Cookman, dissented: "Not only is the majority opinion
unsupported by the facts and existing




case law, but it is also fundamentally unfair. Sadly, justice was
neither honored nor served by the majority." The dissent also noted
"genuine due process implications arising under federal law" with
respect to Justice Benjamin's failure to recuse himself.

Four months later---a month after the petition for writ of certiorari
was filed in this Court---Justice Benjamin filed a concurring opinion.
He defended the merits of the majority opinion as well as his decision
not to recuse. He rejected Caperton's challenge to his participation in
the case under both the Due Process Clause and West Virginia law.
Justice Benjamin reiterated that he had no '"direct, personal,
substantial, pecuniary interest' in this case." Adopting "a standard
merely of 'appearances,'" he concluded, "seems little more than an
invitation to subject West Virginia's justice system to the vagaries of
the day---a framework in which predictability and stability yield to
supposition, innuendo, half-truths, and partisan manipulations."

We granted certiorari.

It is axiomatic that "a fair trial in a fair tribunal is a basic
requirement of due process." As the Court has recognized, however, "most
matters relating to judicial disqualification do not rise to a
constitutional level." The early and leading case on the subject is
Turney v. Ohio (1927). There, the Court stated that "matters of kinship,
personal bias, state policy, remoteness of interest, would seem
generally to be matters merely of legislative discretion."

The Turney Court concluded that the Due Process Clause incorporated the
common-law rule that a judge must recuse himself when he has "a direct,
personal, substantial, pecuniary interest" in a case. This rule reflects
the maxim that "no man is allowed to be a judge in his own cause;
because his interest would certainly bias his judgment, and, not
improbably, corrupt his integrity." Under this rule, "disqualification
for bias or prejudice was not permitted"; those matters were left to
statutes and judicial codes. Personal bias or prejudice "alone would not
be sufficient basis for imposing a constitutional requirement under the
Due Process Clause."

As new problems have emerged that were not discussed at common law,
however, the Court has identified additional instances which, as an
objective matter, require recusal. These are circumstances "in which
experience teaches that the probability of actual bias on the part of
the judge or decisionmaker is too high to be constitutionally
tolerable." To place the present case in proper context, two instances
where the Court has required recusal merit further discussion.

A

The first involved the emergence of local tribunals where a judge had a
financial interest in the outcome of a case, although the interest was
less than what would have been considered personal or direct at common
law.




This was the problem addressed in Turney. There, the mayor of a village
had the authority to sit as a judge (with no jury) to try those accused
of violating a state law prohibiting the possession of alcoholic
beverages. Inherent in this structure were two potential conflicts.
First, the mayor received a salary supplement for performing judicial
duties, and the funds for that compensation derived from the fines
assessed in a case. No fines were assessed upon acquittal. The
mayorjudge thus received a salary supplement only if he convicted the
defendant. Second, sums from the criminal fines were deposited to the
village's general treasury fund for village improvements and repairs.

The Court held that the Due Process Clause required disqualification
"both because of the mayor-judge's direct pecuniary interest in the
outcome, and because of his official motive to convict and to graduate
the fine to help the financial needs of the village." It so held despite
observing that "there are doubtless mayors who would not allow such a
consideration as $12 costs in each case to affect their judgment in
it." The Court articulated the controlling principle:

Every procedure which would offer a possible temptation to the average
man as a judge to forget the burden of proof required to convict the
defendant, or which might lead him not to hold the balance nice, clear
and true between the State and the accused, denies the latter due
process of law.

The Court was thus concerned with more than the traditional common-law
prohibition on direct pecuniary interest. It was also concerned with a
more general concept of interests that tempt adjudicators to disregard
neutrality.

This concern with conflicts resulting from financial incentives was
elaborated in Ward v. Monroeville (1972), which invalidated a conviction
in another mayor's court. In Monroeville , unlike in Turney, the mayor
received no money; instead, the fines the mayor assessed went to the
town's general fisc. The Court held that "the fact that the mayor in
Turney shared directly in the fees and costs did not define the limits
of the principle." The principle, instead, turned on the "possible
temptation" the mayor might face; the mayor's "executive
responsibilities for village finances may make him partisan to maintain
the high level of contribution to those finances from the mayor's
court." As the Court reiterated in another case that Term, "the judge's
financial stake need not be as direct or positive as it appeared to be
in Turney."

The Court in Lavoie further clarified the reach of the Due Process
Clause regarding a judge's financial interest in a case. There, a
justice had cast the deciding vote on the Alabama Supreme Court to
uphold a punitive damages award against an insurance company for
bad-faith refusal to pay a claim. At the time of his vote, the justice
was the lead plaintiff in a nearly identical lawsuit pending in
Alabama's lower courts. His deciding vote, this Court surmised,
"undoubtedly 'raised the stakes'" for the insurance defendant in the
justice's suit.

The Court stressed that it was "not required to decide whether in fact
the justice was influenced." The proper constitutional inquiry is
"whether sitting on the case then before the Supreme Court of Alabama
"would offer a possible temptation to the average judge to lead him




not to hold the balance nice, clear and true." The Court underscored
that "what degree or kind of interest is sufficient to disqualify a
judge from sitting cannot be defined with precision." In the Court's
view, however, it was important that the test have an objective
component.

The Lavoie Court proceeded to distinguish the state-court justice's
particular interest in the case, which required recusal, from interests
that were not a constitutional concern. For instance, "while the other
justices might conceivably have had a slight pecuniary interest" due to
their potential membership in a class-action suit against their own
insurance companies, that interest is "too remote and insubstantial to
violate the constitutional constraints."

B

The second instance requiring recusal that was not discussed at common
law emerged in the criminal contempt context, where a judge had no
pecuniary interest in the case but was challenged because of a conflict
arising from his participation in an earlier proceeding. This Court
characterized that first proceeding (perhaps pejoratively) as a "one-man
grand jury."

In that first proceeding, and as provided by state law, a judge examined
witnesses to determine whether criminal charges should be brought. The
judge called the two petitioners before him. One petitioner answered
questions, but the judge found him untruthful and charged him with
perjury. The second declined to answer on the ground that he did not
have counsel with him, as state law seemed to permit. The judge charged
him with contempt. The judge proceeded to try and convict both
petitioners.

This Court set aside the convictions on grounds that the judge had a
conflict of interest at the trial stage because of his earlier
participation followed by his decision to charge them. The Due Process
Clause required disqualification. The Court recited the general rule
that "no man can be a judge in his own case," adding that "no man is
permitted to try cases where he has an interest in the outcome." It
noted that the disqualifying criteria "cannot be defined with precision.
Circumstances and relationships must be considered." These circumstances
and the prior relationship required recusal: "Having been a part of the
one-man grand jury process a judge cannot be, in the very nature of
things, wholly disinterested in the conviction or acquittal of those
accused." That is because "as a practical matter it is difficult if not
impossible for a judge to free himself from the influence of what took
place in his 'grand-jury' secret session."

The Murchison Court was careful to distinguish the circumstances and the
relationship from those where the Constitution would not require
recusal. It noted that the single-judge grand jury is "more a part of
the accusatory process than an ordinary lay grand juror," and that
"adjudication by a trial judge of a contempt committed in a judge's
presence in open court cannot be likened to the proceedings here." The
judge's prior relationship with the defendant, as well as the
information acquired from the prior proceeding, was of critical import.

Following Murchison the Court held in Mayberry v. Pennsylvania (1971),
"that by reason of the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment a
defendant in criminal contempt




proceedings should be given a public trial before a judge other than the
one reviled by the contemnor." The Court reiterated that this rule rests
on the relationship between the judge and the defendant: "A judge,
vilified as was this Pennsylvania judge, necessarily becomes embroiled
in a running, bitter controversy. No one so cruelly slandered is likely
to maintain that calm detachment necessary for fair adjudication."

Again, the Court considered the specific circumstances presented by the
case. It noted that "not every attack on a judge disqualifies him from
sitting." The Court distinguished the case from Ungarv. Sarafite (1964),
in which the Court had "ruled that a lawyer's challenge, though
'disruptive, recalcitrant and disagreeable commentary,' was still not
'an insulting attack upon the integrity of the judge carrying such
potential for bias as to require disqualification.'" The inquiry is an
objective one. The Court asks not whether the judge is actually,
subjectively biased, but whether the average judge in his position is
"likely" to be neutral, or whether there is an unconstitutional
"potential for bias."

Based on the principles described in these cases we turn to the issue
before us. This problem arises in the context of judicial elections, a
framework not presented in the precedents we have reviewed and
discussed.

Caperton contends that Blankenship's pivotal role in getting Justice
Benjamin elected created a constitutionally intolerable probability of
actual bias. Though not a bribe or criminal influence, Justice Benjamin
would nevertheless feel a debt of gratitude to Blankenship for his
extraordinary efforts to get him elected. That temptation, Caperton
claims, is as strong and inherent in human nature as was the conflict
the Court confronted in Turney and Monroeville when a mayor-judge (or
the city) benefited financially from a defendant's conviction, as well
as the conflict identified in Murchison and Mayberry when a judge was
the object of a defendant's contempt.

Justice Benjamin was careful to address the recusal motions and explain
his reasons why, on his view of the controlling standard,
disqualification was not in order. In four separate opinions issued
during the course of the appeal, he explained why no actual bias had
been established. He found no basis for recusal because Caperton failed
to provide "objective evidence" or "objective information," but merely
"subjective belief" of bias. Nor could anyone "point to any actual
conduct or activity on his part which could be termed 'improper.'" In
other words, based on the facts presented by Caperton, Justice Benjamin
conducted a probing search into his actual motives and inclinations; and
he found none to be improper. We do not question his subjective findings
of impartiality and propriety. Nor do we determine whether there was
actual bias.

Following accepted principles of our legal tradition respecting the
proper performance of judicial functions, judges often inquire into
their subjective motives and purposes in the ordinary course of deciding
a case. This does not mean the inquiry is a simple one. "The work of
deciding cases goes on every day in hundreds of courts throughout the
land. Any judge, one might suppose,




would find it easy to describe the process which he had followed a
thousand times and more. Nothing could be farther from the truth."

The judge inquires into reasons that seem to be leading to a particular
result. Precedent and stare decisis and the text and purpose of the law
and the Constitution; logic and scholarship and experience and common
sense; and fairness and disinterest and neutrality are among the factors
at work. To bring coherence to the process, and to seek respect for the
resulting judgment, judges often explain the reasons for their
conclusions and rulings. There are instances when the introspection that
often attends this process may reveal that what the judge had assumed to
be a proper, controlling factor is not the real one at work. If the
judge discovers that some personal bias or improper consideration seems
to be the actuating cause of the decision or to be an influence so
difficult to dispel that there is a real possibility of undermining
neutrality, the judge may think it necessary to consider withdrawing
from the case.

The difficulties of inquiring into actual bias, and the fact that the
inquiry is often a private one, simply underscore the need for objective
rules. Otherwise there may be no adequate protection against a judge who
simply misreads or misapprehends the real motives at work in deciding
the case. The judge's own inquiry into actual bias, then, is not one
that the law can easily superintend or review, though actual bias, if
disclosed, no doubt would be grounds for appropriate relief. In lieu of
exclusive reliance on that personal inquiry, or on appellate review of
the judge's determination respecting actual bias, the Due Process
Clause has been implemented by objective standards that do not require
proof of actual bias. In defining these standards the Court has asked
whether, "under a realistic appraisal of psychological tendencies and
human weakness," the interest "poses such a risk of actual bias or
prejudgment that the practice must be forbidden if the guarantee of due
process is to be adequately implemented."

We turn to the influence at issue in this case. Not every campaign
contribution by a litigant or attorney creates a probability of bias
that requires a judge's recusal, but this is an exceptional case. We
conclude that there is a serious risk of actual bias---based on
objective and reasonable perceptions---when a person with a personal
stake in a particular case had a significant and disproportionate
influence in placing the judge on the case by raising funds or directing
the judge's election campaign when the case was pending or imminent. The
inquiry centers on the contribution's relative size in comparison to the
total amount of money contributed to the campaign, the total amount
spent in the election, and the apparent effect such contribution had on
the outcome of the election.

Applying this principle, we conclude that Blankenship's campaign efforts
had a significant and disproportionate influence in placing Justice
Benjamin on the case. Blankenship contributed some $3 million to unseat
the incumbent and replace him with Benjamin. His contributions eclipsed
the total amount spent by all other Benjamin supporters and exceeded by
300% the amount spent by Benjamin's campaign committee. Caperton claims
Blankenship spent $1 million more than the total amount spent by the
campaign committees of both candidates combined.




Massey responds that Blankenship's support, while significant, did not
cause Benjamin's victory. In the end the people of West Virginia elected
him, and they did so based on many reasons other than Blankenship's
efforts. Massey points out that every major state newspaper, but one,
endorsed Benjamin. It also contends that then-Justice McGraw cost
himself the election by giving a speech during the campaign, a speech
the opposition seized upon for its own advantage.

Justice Benjamin raised similar arguments. He asserted that "the outcome
of the 2004 election was due primarily to his own campaign's message,"
as well as McGraw's "devastating" speech in which he "made a number of
controversial claims which became a matter of statewide discussion in
the media, on the internet, and elsewhere."

Whether Blankenship's campaign contributions were a necessary and
sufficient cause of Benjamin's victory is not the proper inquiry. Much
like determining whether a judge is actually biased, proving what
ultimately drives the electorate to choose a particular candidate is a
difficult endeavor, not likely to lend itself to a certain conclusion.
This is particularly true where, as here, there is no procedure for
judicial factfinding and the sole trier of fact is the one accused of
bias. Due process requires an objective inquiry into whether the
contributor's influence on the election under all the circumstances
"would offer a possible temptation to the average judge to lead him not
to hold the balance nice, clear and true." In an election decided by
fewer than 50,000 votes (382,036 to 334,301), Blankenship's campaign
contributions---in comparison to the total amount contributed to the
campaign, as well as the total amount spent in the election---had a
significant and disproportionate influence on the electoral outcome. And
the risk that Blankenship's influence engendered actual bias is
sufficiently substantial that it "must be forbidden if the guarantee of
due process is to be adequately implemented."

The temporal relationship between the campaign contributions, the
justice's election, and the pendency of the case is also critical. It
was reasonably foreseeable, when the campaign contributions were made,
that the pending case would be before the newly elected justice. The
$50 million adverse jury verdict had been entered before the election,
and the Supreme Court of Appeals was the next step once the state trial
court dealt with post-trial motions. So it became at once apparent that,
absent recusal, Justice Benjamin would review a judgment that cost his
biggest donor's company $50 million. Although there is no allegation of
a quid pm quo agreement, the fact remains that Blankenship's
extraordinary contributions were made at a time when he had a vested
stake in the outcome. Just as no man is allowed to be a judge in his own
cause, similar fears of bias can arise when---without the consent of
the other parties---a man chooses the judge in his own cause. And
applying this principle to the judicial election process, there was here
a serious, objective risk of actual bias that required Justice
Benjamin's recusal.

Justice Benjamin did undertake an extensive search for actual bias. But,
as we have indicated, that is just one step in the judicial process;
objective standards may also require recusal whether or not actual bias
exists or can be proved. Due process "may sometimes bar trial by judges
who have no actual bias and who would do their very best to weigh the
scales of justice equally between contending parties." The failure to
consider objective standards requiring




recusal is not consistent with the imperatives of due process. We find
that Blankenship's significant and disproportionate influence ---
coupled with the temporal relationship between the election and the
pending case---"offers a possible temptation to the average judge to
lead him not to hold the balance nice, clear and true." On these extreme
facts the probability of actual bias rises to an unconstitutional level.

IV

Our decision today addresses an extraordinary situation where the
Constitution requires recusal. Massey and its amici predict that various
adverse consequences will follow from recognizing a constitutional
violation here---ranging from a flood of recusal motions to
unnecessary interference with judicial elections. We disagree. The facts
now before us are extreme by any measure. The parties point to no other
instance involving judicial campaign contributions that presents a
potential for bias comparable to the circumstances in this case.

It is true that extreme cases often test the bounds of established legal
principles, and sometimes no administrable standard may be available to
address the perceived wrong. But it is also true that extreme cases are
more likely to cross constitutional limits, requiring this Court's
intervention and formulation of objective standards. This is
particularly true when due process is violated.

This Court's recusal cases are illustrative. In each case the Court
dealt with extreme facts that created an unconstitutional probability of
bias that "cannot be defined with precision." Yet the Court articulated
an objective standard to protect the parties' basic right to a fair
trial in a fair tribunal. The Court was careful to distinguish the
extreme facts of the cases before it from those interests that would not
rise to a constitutional level. In this case we do nothing more than
what the Court has done before.

As such, it is worth noting the effects, or lack thereof, of the Court's
prior decisions. Even though the standards announced in those cases
raised questions similar to those that might be asked after our decision
today, the Court was not flooded with Monroeville or Murchison motions.
That is perhaps due in part to the extreme facts those standards sought
to address. Courts proved quite capable of applying the standards to
less extreme situations.

One must also take into account the judicial reforms the States have
implemented to eliminate even the appearance of partiality. Almost every
State---West Virginia included---has adopted the American Bar
Association's objective standard: "A judge shall avoid impropriety and
the appearance of impropriety." The ABA Model Code's test for appearance
of impropriety is "whether the conduct would create in reasonable minds
a perception that the judge's ability to carry out judicial
responsibilities with integrity, impartiality and competence is
impaired."

The West Virginia Code of Judicial Conduct also requires a judge to
"disqualify himself or herself in a proceeding in which the judge's
impartiality might reasonably be questioned." Under Canon 3E(1), "the
question of disqualification focuses on whether an objective assessment
of




the judge's conduct produces a reasonable question about impartiality,
not on the judge's subjective perception of the ability to act fairly."
Indeed, some States require recusal based on campaign contributions
similar to those in this case.

These codes of conduct serve to maintain the integrity of the judiciary
and the rule of law. The Conference of the Chief Justices has
underscored that the codes are "the principal safeguard against judicial
campaign abuses" that threaten to imperil "public confidence in the
fairness and integrity of the nation's elected judges." This is a vital
state interest:

Courts, in our system, elaborate principles of law in the course of
resolving disputes. The power and the prerogative of a court to perform
this function rest, in the end, upon the respect accorded to its
judgments. The citizen's respect for judgments depends in turn upon the
issuing court's absolute probity. Judicial integrity is, in consequence,
a state interest of the highest order.

It is for this reason that States may choose to "adopt recusal standards
more rigorous than due process requires."

"The Due Process Clause demarks only the outer boundaries of judicial
disqualifications. Congress and the states, of course, remain free to
impose more rigorous standards for judicial disqualification than those
we find mandated here today." Because the codes of judicial conduct
provide more protection than due process requires, most disputes over
disqualification will be resolved without resort to the Constitution.
Application of the constitutional standard implicated in this case will
thus be confined to rare instances.

The judgment of the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia is
reversed, and the case is remanded for further proceedings not
inconsistent with this opinion.

Chief Justice ROBERTS, with whom Justice SCALIA, Justice THOMAS, and
Justice AUTO join, dissenting.

I, of course, share the majority's sincere concerns about the need to
maintain a fair, independent, and impartial judiciary---and one that
appears to be such. But I fear that the Court's decision will undermine
rather than promote these values.

Until today, we have recognized exactly two situations in which the
Federal Due Process Clause requires disqualification of a judge: when
the judge has a financial interest in the outcome of the case, and when
the judge is trying a defendant for certain criminal contempts. Vaguer
notions of bias or the appearance of bias were never a basis for
disqualification, either at common law or under our constitutional
precedents. Those issues were instead addressed by legislation or court
rules.

Today, however, the Court enlists the Due Process Clause to overturn a
judge's failure to recuse because of a "probability of bias." Unlike
the established grounds for disqualification, a




"probability of bias" cannot be defined in any limited way. The Court's
new "rule" provides no guidance to judges and litigants about when
recusal will be constitutionally required. This will inevitably lead to
an increase in allegations that judges are biased, however groundless
those charges may be. The end result will do far more to erode public
confidence in judicial impartiality than an isolated failure to recuse
in a particular case.

I

There is a "presumption of honesty and integrity in those serving as
adjudicators." All judges take an oath to uphold the Constitution and
apply the law impartially, and we trust that they will live up to this
promise. We have thus identified only two situations in which the Due
Process Clause requires disqualification of a judge: when the judge has
a financial interest in the outcome of the case, and when the judge is
presiding over certain types of criminal contempt proceedings.

It is well established that a judge may not preside over a case in which
he has a "direct, personal, substantial, pecuniary interest." This
principle is relatively straightforward, and largely tracks the
longstanding common-law rule regarding judicial recusal. For example, a
defendant's due process rights are violated when he is tried before a
judge who is "paid for his service only when he convicts the defendant."

It may also violate due process when a judge presides over a criminal
contempt case that resulted from the defendant's hostility towards the
judge. In Mayberry , the defendant directed a steady stream of
expletives and ad hominem attacks at the judge throughout the trial.
When that defendant was subsequently charged with criminal contempt, we
concluded that he "should be given a public trial before a judge other
than the one reviled by the contemnor."

Our decisions in this area have also emphasized when the Due Process
Clause does not require recusal:

All questions of judicial qualification may not involve constitutional
validity. Thus matters of kinship, personal bias, state policy,
remoteness of interest, would seem generally to be matters merely of
legislative discretion.

Subject to the two well-established exceptions described above,
questions of judicial recusal are regulated by "common law, statute, or
the professional standards of the bench and bar."

In any given case, there are a number of factors that could give rise to
a "probability" or "appearance" of bias: friendship with a party or
lawyer, prior employment experience, membership in clubs or
associations, prior speeches and writings, religious affiliation, and
countless other considerations. We have never held that the Due Process
Clause requires recusal for any of these reasons, even though they could
be viewed as presenting a "probability of bias." Many state statutes
require recusal based on a probability or appearance of bias, but "that
alone would not be sufficient basis for imposing a constitutional
requirement under the Due




Process Clause." States are, of course, free to adopt broader recusal
rules than the Constitution requires---and every State has---but
these developments are not continuously incorporated into the Due
Process Clause.

In departing from this clear line between when recusal is
constitutionally required and when it is not, the majority repeatedly
emphasizes the need for an "objective" standard. The majority's analysis
is "objective" in that it does not inquire into Justice Benjamin's
motives or decisionmaking process. But the standard the majority
articulates---"probability of bias"---fails to provide clear,
workable guidance for future cases. At the most basic level, it is
unclear whether the new probability of bias standard is somehow limited
to financial support in judicial elections, or applies to judicial
recusal questions more generally.

But there are other fundamental questions as well. With little help from
the majority, courts will now have to determine:

1. How much money is too much money? What level of contribution or
expenditure gives rise to a "probability of bias"?

1. How do we determine whether a given expenditure is
"disproportionate"? Disproportionate to what?

1. Are independent, non-coordinated expenditures treated the same as
direct contributions to a candidate's campaign? What about
contributions to independent outside groups supporting a candidate?

1. Does it matter whether the litigant has contributed to other
candidates or made large expenditures in connection with other
elections?

1. Does the amount at issue in the case matter? What if this case were
an employment dispute with only $10,000 at stake? What if the
plaintiffs only sought non-monetary relief such as an injunction or
declaratory judgment?

1. Does the analysis change depending on whether the judge whose
disqualification is sought sits on a trial court, appeals court, or
state supreme court?

1. How long does the probability of bias last? Does the probability of
bias diminish over time as the election recedes? Does it matter whether
the judge plans to run for reelection?

1. What if the "disproportionately" large expenditure is made by an
industry association, trade union, physicians' group, or the plaintiffs'
bar? Must the judge recuse in all cases that affect the association's
interests? Must the judge recuse in all cases in which a party or lawyer
is a member of that group? Does it matter how much the litigant
contributed to the association?

1. What if the case involves a social or ideological issue rather than
a financial one? Must a judge recuse from cases involving, say, abortion
rights if he has received "disproportionate" support from individuals
who feel strongly about either side of that issue? If the supporter
wants to help elect judges who are "tough on crime," must the judge
recuse in all criminal cases?




11. What if the candidate draws "disproportionate" support from a
particular racial, religious, ethnic, or other group, and the case
involves an issue of particular importance to that group?

11. What if the supporter is not a party to the pending or imminent
case, but his interests will be affected by the decision? Does the
Court's analysis apply if the supporter "chooses the judge" not in his
case, but in someone else's?

11. What if the case implicates a regulatory issue that is of great
importance to the party making the expenditures, even though he has no
direct financial interest in the outcome (e.g., a facial challenge to an
agency rulemaking or a suit seeking to limit an agency's jurisdiction)?

11. Must the judge's vote be outcome determinative in order for his
non-recusal to constitute a due process violation?

11. Does the due process analysis consider the underlying merits of the
suit? Does it matter whether the decision is clearly right (or wrong) as
a matter of state law?

11. What if a lower court decision in favor of the supporter is
affirmed on the merits on appeal, by a panel with no "debt of gratitude"
to the supporter? Does that "moot" the due process claim?

11. What if the judge voted against the supporter in many other cases?

11. What if the judge disagrees with the supporter's message or
tactics? What if the judge expressly disclaims the support of this
person?

11. Should we assume that elected judges feel a "debt of hostility"
towards major opponents of their candidacies? Must the judge recuse in
cases involving individuals or groups who spent large amounts of money
trying unsuccessfully to defeat him?

11. If there is independent review of a judge's recusal decision, e.g.,
by a panel of other judges, does this completely foreclose a due process
claim?

21. Does a debt of gratitude for endorsements by newspapers, interest
groups, politicians, or celebrities also give rise to a constitutionally
unacceptable probability of bias? How would we measure whether such
support is disproportionate?

21. Does close personal friendship between a judge and a party or
lawyer now give rise to a probability of bias?

21. Does it matter whether the campaign expenditures come from a party
or the party's attorney? If from a lawyer, must the judge recuse in
every case involving that attorney?

21. Does what is unconstitutional vary from State to State? What if
particular States have a history of expensive judicial elections?

21. Under the majority's "objective" test, do we analyze the due
process issue through the lens of a reasonable person, a reasonable
lawyer, or a reasonable judge?

21. What role does causation play in this analysis? The Court sends
conflicting signals on this point. The majority asserts that "whether
Blankenship's campaign contributions were a necessary and sufficient
cause of Benjamin's victory is not the proper inquiry." But elsewhere
in the opinion, the majority considers "the apparent effect such
contribution had on the outcome of the election," and whether the
litigant has been able to "choose the judge in his own cause." If
causation is a pertinent factor, how do we know whether the contribution
or expenditure had any effect on the outcome of the election? What if




the judge won in a landslide? What if the judge won primarily because of
his opponent's missteps?

21. Is the due process analysis less probing for incumbent judges ---
who typically have a great advantage in elections---than for
challengers?

21. How final must the pending case be with respect to the
contributor's interest? What if, for example, the only issue on appeal
is whether the court should certify a class of plaintiffs? Is recusal
required just as if the issue in the pending case were ultimate
liability?

21. Which cases are implicated by this doctrine? Must the case be
pending at the time of the election? Reasonably likely to be brought?
What about an important but unanticipated case filed shortly after the
election?

21. When do we impute a probability of bias from one party to another?
Does a contribution from a corporation get imputed to its executives,
and vice-versa? Does a contribution or expenditure by one family member
get imputed to other family members?

31. What if the election is nonpartisan? What if the election is just a
yes-or-no vote about whether to retain an incumbent?

31. What type of support is disqualifying? What if the supporter's
expenditures are used to fund voter registration or get-out-the-vote
efforts rather than television advertisements?

31. Are contributions or expenditures in connection with a primary
aggregated with those in the general election? What if the contributor
supported a different candidate in the primary? Does that dilute the
debt of gratitude?

31. What procedures must be followed to challenge a state judge's
failure to recuse? May Caperton claims only be raised on direct review?
Or may such claims also be brought in federal district court under 42
U.S.C. § 1983, which allows a person deprived of a federal right by a
state official to sue for damages? If § 1983 claims are available, who
are the proper defendants? The judge? The whole court? The clerk of
court?

31. What about state-court cases that are already closed? Can the
losing parties in those cases now seek collateral relief in federal
district court under § 1983? What statutes of limitation should be
applied to such suits?

31. What is the proper remedy? After a successful Caperton motion, must
the parties start from scratch before the lower courts? Is any part of
the lower court judgment retained?

31. Does a litigant waive his due process claim if he waits until after
decision to raise it? Or would the claim only be ripe after decision,
when the judge's actions or vote suggest a probability of bias?

31. Are the parties entitled to discovery with respect to the judge's
recusal decision?

31. If a judge erroneously fails to recuse, do we apply harmless-error
review?

31. Does the judge get to respond to the allegation that he is probably
biased, or is his reputation solely in the hands of the parties to the
case?

41. What if the parties settle a Caperton claim as part of a broader
settlement of the case? Does that leave the judge with no way to salvage
his reputation?

These are only a few uncertainties that quickly come to mind. Judges and
litigants will surely encounter others when they are forced to, or wish
to, apply the majority's decision in different circumstances. Today's
opinion requires state and federal judges simultaneously to act as




political scientists (why did candidate X win the election?), economists
(was the financial support disproportionate?), and psychologists (is
there likely to be a debt of gratitude?).

The Court's inability to formulate a "judicially discernible and
manageable standard" strongly counsels against the recognition of a
novel constitutional right. The need to consider these and countless
other questions helps explain why the common law and this Court's
constitutional jurisprudence have never required disqualification on
such vague grounds as "probability" or "appearance" of bias.

A

To its credit, the Court seems to recognize that the inherently
boundless nature of its new rule poses a problem. But the majority's
only answer is that the present case is an "extreme" one, so there is no
need to worry about other cases. The Court repeats this point over and
over.

But this is just so much whistling past the graveyard. Claims that have
little chance of success are nonetheless frequently filed. The success
rate for certiorari petitions before this Court is approximately 1.1%,
and yet the previous Term some 8,241 were filed. Every one of the
"Caperton motions" or appeals or § 1983 actions will claim that the
judge is biased, or probably biased, bringing the judge and the judicial
system into disrepute. And all future litigants will assert that their
case is really the most extreme thus far.

Extreme cases often test the bounds of established legal principles.
There is a cost to yielding to the desire to correct the extreme case,
rather than adhering to the legal principle. That cost has been
demonstrated so often that it is captured in a legal aphorism: "Hard
cases make bad law."

Consider the cautionary tale of our decisions in United States v. Halper
and Hudson v. United States. Historically, we have held that the Double
Jeopardy Clause only applies to criminal penalties, not civil ones. But
in Halper , the Court held that a civil penalty could violate the Clause
if it were "overwhelmingly disproportionate to the damages the defendant
has caused" and resulted in a "clear injustice." We acknowledged that
this inquiry would not be an "exact pursuit," but the Court assured
litigants that it was only announcing "a rule for the rare case, the
case such as the one before us."

Just eight years later, we granted certiorari in Hudson "because of
concerns about the wide variety of novel double jeopardy claims spawned
in the wake of Halper." The novel claim that we had recognized in
Halper turned out not to be so "rare" after all, and the test we adopted
in that case---"overwhelmingly disproportionate"---had "proved
unworkable." We thus abandoned the Halper rule, ruing our "ill
considered" "deviation from longstanding double jeopardy principles."




The deja vu is enough to make one swoon. Today, the majority again
departs from a clear, longstanding constitutional rule to accommodate an
"extreme" case involving "grossly disproportionate" amounts of money. I
believe we will come to regret this decision as well, when courts are
forced to deal with a wide variety of Caperton motions, each claiming
the title of "most extreme" or "most disproportionate."

B

And why is the Court so convinced that this is an extreme case? It is
true that Don Blankenship spent a large amount of money in connection
with this election. But this point cannot be emphasized strongly enough:
Other than a $1,000 direct contribution from Blankenship, Justice
Benjamin and his campaign had no control over how this money was spent.
Campaigns go to great lengths to develop precise messages and
strategies. An insensitive or ham-handed ad campaign by an independent
third party might distort the campaign's message or cause a backlash
against the candidate, even though the candidate was not responsible for
the ads. The majority repeatedly characterizes Blankenship's spending as
"contributions" or "campaign contributions," but it is more accurate to
refer to them as "independent expenditures." Blankenship only
"contributed" $1,000 to the Benjamin campaign.

Moreover, Blankenship's independent expenditures do not appear "grossly
disproportionate" compared to other such expenditures in this very
election. "And for the Sake of the Kids"---an independent group that
received approximately two-thirds of its funding from Blankenship ---
spent $3,623,500 in connection with the election. But large independent
expenditures were also made in support of Justice Benjamin's opponent.
"Consumers for Justice"---an independent group that received large
contributions from the plaintiffs' bar---spent approximately $2
million in this race. And Blankenship has made large expenditures in
connection with several previous West Virginia elections, which
undercuts any notion that his involvement in this election was "intended
to influence the outcome" of particular pending litigation.

It is also far from clear that Blankenship's expenditures affected the
outcome of this election. Justice Benjamin won by a comfortable 7-point
margin (53.3% to 46.7%). Many observers believed that Justice Benjamin's
opponent doomed his candidacy by giving a well-publicized speech that
made several curious allegations; this speech was described in the local
media as "deeply disturbing" and worse. Justice Benjamin's opponent also
refused to give interviews or participate in debates. All but one of the
major West Virginia newspapers endorsed Justice Benjamin. Justice
Benjamin just might have won because the voters of West Virginia thought
he would be a better judge than his opponent. Unlike the majority, I
cannot say with any degree of certainty that Blankenship "chose the
judge in his own cause." I would give the voters of West Virginia more
credit than that.

It is an old cliche, but sometimes the cure is worse than the disease. I
am sure there are cases where a "probability of bias" should lead the
prudent judge to step aside, but the judge fails to do so. Maybe this is
one of them. But I believe that opening the door to recusal claims under
the Due Process Clause, for an amorphous "probability of bias," will
itself bring our judicial system




into undeserved disrepute, and diminish the confidence of the American
people in the fairness and integrity of their courts. I hope I am wrong.

Justice SCALIA, dissenting.

The principal purpose of this Court's exercise of its certiorari
jurisdiction is to clarify the law. As THE CHIEF JUSTICE'S dissent makes
painfully clear, the principal consequence of today's decision is to
create vast uncertainty with respect to a point of law that can be
raised in all litigated cases in (at least) those 39 States that elect
their judges. This course was urged upon us on grounds that it would
preserve the public's confidence in the judicial system.

The decision will have the opposite effect. What above all else is
eroding public confidence in the Nation's judicial system is the
perception that litigation is just a game, that the party with the most
resourceful lawyer can play it to win, that our seemingly interminable
legal proceedings are wonderfully self-perpetuating but incapable of
delivering real-world justice. The Court's opinion will reinforce that
perception, adding to the vast arsenal of lawyerly gambits what will
come to be known as the Caperton claim. The facts relevant to
adjudicating it will have to be litigated---and likewise the law
governing it, which will be indeterminate for years to come, if not
forever. Many billable hours will be spent in poring through volumes of
campaign finance reports, and many more in contesting nonrecusal
decisions through every available means.

A Talmudic maxim instructs with respect to the Scripture: "Turn it over,
and turn it over, for all is therein." Divinely inspired text may
contain the answers to all earthly questions, but the Due Process Clause
most assuredly does not. The Court today continues its quixotic quest to
right all wrongs and repair all imperfections through the Constitution.
Alas, the quest cannot succeed---which is why some wrongs and
imperfections have been called nonjusticiable. In the best of all
possible worlds, should judges sometimes recuse even where the clear
commands of our prior due process law do not require it? Undoubtedly.
The relevant question, however, is whether we do more good than harm by
seeking to correct this imperfection through expansion of our
constitutional mandate in a manner ungoverned by any discernable rule.
The answer is obvious.

Questions:

1. You can watch some of the television advertisements that Don
Blankenship and "And For the Sake of the Kids" ran opposing Justice
Warren McGraw here , here , here , here , here , here , here , here ,
and here . In 2009, the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia
reheard the appeal, with Justice Benjamin recused, and once again
overturned the lower court verdict, holding 4-1 that the contract
required Caperton to file his action in Virginia. Caperton refiled his
action in Virginia, where it is still pending. The

1. On April 5, 2010, an explosion at Massey's Upper Big Branch mine
killed 29 miners. In the wake of the disaster, Blankenship resigned as
CEO of Massey. On December 6,

2011, Mine Safety and Health Administration concluded that flagrant
safety violations contributed to a coal dust explosion, and imposed
$10.8 million in penalties on Massey.




Blankenship was indicted on criminal charges, convicted of misdemeanor
conspiracy to violate federal mine safety standards, and sentenced to
one year in prison. Caperton's action against Massey and the Upper Big
Branch disaster were widely reported, including in the New York Times ,
the Daily Beast , Mother Jones , and elsewhere.

1. After his release from prison, Blankenship became a Republican
candidate for the United States Senate in West Virginia in 2018, but
lost in the primary. You can see one of his campaign ads, in which he
refers to Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell as "Cocaine Mitch" and
makes other questionable comments here . When Blankenship lost, the
McConnell campaign tweeted the following image.

::: {style="width: 76.66666666666667%;"}
![Picture #78](../assets/img/img_0078.png)
:::

1. In Caperton v. Massey, Justice Kennedy's majority opinion held that
due process requires recusal when the facts present a "serious,
objective risk of actual bias." The Roberts and Scalia dissents argued
that the standard adopted by the majority is meaningless and unworkable,
and would erode public confidence in the judiciary. Which argument do
you find more compelling?

Further Reading:

- Charles Gardner Geyh, Judicial Disqualification: An Analysis of
Federal Law, Federal

Judicial Center (2010)

- John P. Frank, Disqualification of Judges, 56 Yale L.J. 605 (1947)

- Hearing on Examining the State of Judicial Recusals after Caperton v.
A.T. Massey, Hearing before the Subcomm. on Courts and Competition
Policy of the H. Comm, on the

Judiciary, 111th Cong. (2009)

- Bruce A. Green, Fear of the Unknown: Judicial Ethics after Caperton,
60 Syracuse L.

Rev. 229 (2010)

::: {style="width: 76.66666666666667%;"}
![Picture #79](../assets/img/img_0079.png)
:::




- Jeffrey W. Stempel, Playing Forty Questions: Responding to Justice
Roberts' Concerns

in Caperton and Some Tentative Answers About Operationalizing Judicial
Recusal and

Due Process , 39 Southwestern L. Rev. 1 (2009)

- Pamela S. Karlan, Electing Judges, Judging Elections, and the Lessons
of Caperton,

123 Harv. L. Rev. 80 (2009)

- Kenneth L. Karst, Caperton's Amici, 33 Seattle U. L. Rev. 633 (2010)

- Ronald D. Rotunda, Judicial Disqualification in the Aftermath of
Caperton v. A.T. Massey

Coal Co., 60 Syracuse L. Rev. 247 (2010)

- Jed H. Shugerman, In Defense of Appearances: What Caperton v. Massey
Should Have

Said , 59 DePaul L. Rev. 529 (2010)

### Judicial Misconduct

Order, now my court is in session, will you please stand? First, allow
me to introduce myself, my name is Judge Hundredyears. Some people call
me Judge Dread. Now, I have come here to whoop you, to try all you
rudeboys for shooting black people. In my court only we talk, cause I'm
vexed, and I am the rudeboy today . 129

### Model Code of Judicial Conduct: Canon 2

A judge shall perform the duties of judicial office impartially,
competently, and diligently.

### Model Rule 2.3: Bias, Prejudice, and Harassment

A. A judge shall perform the duties of judicial office, including
administrative duties, without bias or prejudice.

B. A judge shall not, in the performance of judicial duties, by words or
conduct manifest bias or prejudice, or engage in harassment, including
but not limited to bias, prejudice, or harassment based upon race, sex,
gender, religion, national origin, ethnicity, disability, age, sexual
orientation, marital status, socioeconomic status, or political
affiliation, and shall not permit court staff, court officials, or
others subject to the judge's direction and control to do so.

C. A judge shall require lawyers in proceedings before the court to
refrain from manifesting bias or prejudice, or engaging in harassment,
based upon attributes including but not limited to race, sex, gender,
religion, national origin, ethnicity, disability, age, sexual
orientation, marital status, socioeconomic status, or political
affiliation, against parties, witnesses, lawyers, or others.

D. The restrictions of paragraphs (B) and (C) do not preclude judges or
lawyers from making legitimate reference to the listed factors, or
similar factors, when they are relevant to an issue in a proceeding.

129

Prince Buster (Cecil Bustamente Campbell / Muhammed Yusef Ali), Judge
Dread (1967).




::: {style="width: 66.58823529411765%;"}
![Picture #80](../assets/img/img_0080.png)
:::

Judge Alvin D. Lichtenstein (1984)

In re Inquiry Concerning Lichtenstein, 685 P. 2d 204 (Colo. 1984)

Summary: Burns shot and killed his wife when he learned she was planning
to leave him, and pleaded guilty to second-degree murder. At the
sentencing hearing, Judge Lichtenstein observed, among other things,
that Burns's mental state was affected by "highly provoking acts on the
part of the victim," and imposed a two-year work release sentence. The
Commission on Judicial Discipline found misconduct and recommended a
public reprimand. The Colorado Supreme Court rejected the recommendation
and dismissed the complaint.

PER CURIAM.

Pursuant to Article VI, Section 23(3)(e) of the Colorado Constitution,
the Commission on Judicial Discipline certified the record of these
proceedings to this court and recommended that a public reprimand be
issued to District Judge Alvin D. Lichtenstein because he violated Canon
2A of the Colorado Code of Judicial Conduct. Having reviewed the record
of the proceedings, we conclude that the conduct of Judge Lichtenstein
did not violate Canon 2A of the Code. We therefore reject the
Commission's recommendation of a public reprimand and return the case to
the Commission with directions to dismiss the complaint.

::: {style="width: 66.58823529411765%;"}
![Picture #81](../assets/img/img_0081.png)
:::




On December 5, 1983, a formal complaint was filed with the Commission,
alleging that on June 22, 1983, while serving as a district judge in the
Denver District Court and presiding over a criminal action, Judge
Lichtenstein made remarks during a sentencing hearing which "undermined
public confidence in the integrity and impartiality of the judiciary"
and "tended to bring the judiciary into disrepute" in violation of Canon
2A of the Code. 130 The facts are not in dispute. Judge Lichtenstein was
appointed a district judge of the Second Judicial District on January 4,
1978. In November 1980 he was elected to serve a six year term and is
currently serving that term of office. During the events in question he
was assigned to the criminal division of the Denver District Court. As
part of his judicial responsibilities, Judge Lichtenstein heard various
motions in the case of People v. Clarence Burns, in which Burns was
charged with the first degree murder of his wife on August 15,1982.
During the pendency of the case, the defendant filed a motion to
suppress a confession, which was heard by Judge Lichtenstein on April 4,
1983. Various witnesses testified at the suppression hearing, including
a clinical psychologist who described the defendant's condition on
August 15, the day of the shooting, as one of severe and suicidal
depression resulting from the fact that he and his wife had separated
earlier in the month. The judge granted the motion, ruling that the
defendant's state of depression preexisted and continued after his
arrest and "caused a cognitive impairment which prevented the Defendant
from understanding his Miranda rights and from intelligently waiving
them." Thereafter, a plea agreement was reached between the defendant
and the district attorney's office and, on May 2, 1983, the defendant
entered a plea of guilty to second degree murder in exchange for a
dismissal of the first degree murder charge. The defendant's guilty plea
was accepted, and the case was continued for a sentencing hearing on
June 22, 1983.

During the sentencing hearing the judge received the stipulated
testimony of one witness, considered the testimony of five additional
witnesses, reviewed the videotaped deposition of the defendant's and
victim's fifteen-year-old son, and considered the statements of counsel.
Judge Lichtenstein began his remarks by stating that he had thoroughly
reviewed the presentence report and had considered the matters presented
by both sides during the sentencing hearing. Noting that Colorado case
law required him to state on the record the reasons for the imposition
of a sentence, the judge proceeded to describe the various degrees of
homicide, the presumptive sentence of eight to twelve years for second
degree murder, the statutory provision authorizing a sentence outside
the presumptive range for extraordinary mitigating or aggravating
circumstances, and concluded that extraordinary mitigating circumstances
existed in this case. After stating that he was incorporating the
specific findings of fact which he had previously made in ruling on the
defendant's motion to suppress, the judge found that the defendant's
capacity to appreciate the wrongfulness of his conduct was significantly
impaired by a state of severe depression arising from his inability to
understand why his wife had left him.

130

After the formal complaint was filed and during the preliminary
investigation of this matter by the Commission, other complaints were
filed alleging that Judge Lichtenstein exhibited a bias in favor of
criminal defendants, particularly those who allegedly committed crimes
against women, and that he had a bias against women. These charges were
investigated by the Commission and found to be without substance or
merit. We therefore limit our consideration to the sentencing remarks
made by Judge Lichtenstein.




The judge then made the following remarks which formed the basis of the
formal complaint filed against him:

The Court finds that this mental state, his mental and emotional
condition, combined with the sudden heat of passion caused by a series
of highly provoking acts on the part of the victim of leaving him
without any warning; in fact, based on the testimony that the Court has
heard, in a sense deceiving him as to her intentions by being extremely
loving and caring up to and through the morning that she left the family
home with the full intention of obtaining a divorce and proceeding with
a separation from him without even giving him any knowledge of her
whereabouts or that of their son, the Court finds that this affected the
Defendant sufficiently so that it excited an irresistible passion as it
would in any reasonable person under the circumstances and,
consequently, would warrant a sentence under the extraordinary
mitigating terms of the statute.

The judge imposed a sentence of four years plus one year of parole,
suspended the sentence, and ordered the defendant to undergo supervision
by the Probation Department under various conditions including a
two-year work release sentence to the county jail and the successful
completion of a program of psychotherapy. 131 The sentencing comments of
the judge and the four-year suspended sentence generated extensive
publicity. The formal complaint was thereafter filed with the
Commission.

The Commission found that Judge Lichtenstein's sentencing remarks "did
not convey his intended meaning, and, as a direct result, the public
questioned his impartiality on the bench and his ability and willingness
to faithfully adhere to the law." The Commission concluded that,
although not constituting willful misconduct, the judge's remarks
nonetheless violated Canon 2A by bringing the judiciary into disrepute
and undermining public confidence in the integrity and impartiality of
the judiciary. The Commission, with three members dissenting,
recommended a public reprimand.

Because we have not previously addressed the matter of judicial
discipline under Article VI, Section 23 of the Colorado Constitution, we
take this occasion to delineate the constitutional basis of our
responsibility in this matter. Article VI, Section 23(3), which became
effective on July 1, 1983, states in pertinent part:

131

After the sentencing hearing, the judge on June 28, 1983, sua sponte ,
vacated the suspended sentence and imposed a sentence of four years
imprisonment plus one year of parole. Thereafter, the defendant and the
district attorney filed original proceedings in this court directed to
the June 22 and June 28 sentences. The defendant requested that the
sentence of June 28 be vacated and that the original sentence of June 22
be reinstated. The district attorney, on the other hand, requested that
both sentences be vacated and that the district judge be directed to
impose a sentence within the aggravated range or at least a sentence
within the presumptive range for second degree murder. We held that the
sentence of June 22 was an illegal sentence and remanded the case for
resentencing.




(s. A justice or judge of any court of record of this state, in
accordance with the procedure set forth in this subsection (3), may be
removed or disciplined for willful misconduct in office, willful or
persistent failure to perform his duties, intemperance, or violation of
any canon of the Colorado code of judicial conduct, or he may be retired
for disability interfering with the performance of his duties which is,
or is likely to become, of a permanent character.

(s. The commission may, after such investigation as it deems
necessary, order informal remedial action; order a formal hearing to be
held before it concerning the removal, retirement, suspension, censure,
reprimand, or other discipline of a justice or a judge; or request the
supreme court to appoint three special masters, who shall be justices or
judges of courts of record, to hear and take evidence in any such matter
and to report thereon to the commission. After a formal hearing or after
considering the record and report of the masters, if the commission
finds good cause therefor, it may take informal remedial action, or it
may recommend to the supreme court the removal, retirement, suspension,
censure, reprimand, or discipline, as the case may be, of the justice or
judge. The commission may also recommend that the costs of its
investigation and hearing be assessed against such justice or judge.

(s. Following receipt of a recommendation from the commission, the
supreme court shall review the record of the proceedings on the law and
facts and in its discretion may permit the introduction of additional
evidence and shall order removal, retirement, suspension, censure,
reprimand, or discipline, as it finds just and proper, or wholly reject
the recommendation. Upon an order for retirement, the justice or judge
shall thereby be retired with the same rights and privileges as if he
retired pursuant to statute. Upon an order for removal, the justice or
judge shall thereby be removed from office, and his salary shall cease
from the date of such order. On the entry of an order for retirement or
for removal of a judge, his office shall be deemed vacant.

(s. Prior to the filing of a recommendation to the supreme court by
the commission against any justice or judge, all papers filed with and
proceedings before the commission on judicial discipline or masters
appointed by the supreme court, pursuant to this subsection (3), shall
be confidential, and the filing of papers with and the giving of
testimony before the commission or the masters shall be privileged; but
no other publication of such papers or proceedings shall be privileged
in any action for defamation; except that the record filed by the
commission in the supreme court continues privileged and a writing which
was privileged prior to its filing with the commission or the masters
does not lose such privilege by such filing.

Canon 2A of the Code states that "a judge should respect and comply with
the law and should conduct himself at all times in a manner that
promotes public confidence in the integrity and impartiality of the
judiciary." This canon includes within its scope statements made by a
judge




during judicial proceedings. Judicial misconduct creating the need for
discipline may thus arise from the same source as judicial conduct that
is within the scope of appellate review. The former seeks to prevent
potential prejudice to the judicial system itself, while the latter
seeks to correct erroneous legal rulings prejudicial to a particular
party.

The question of whether Judge Lichtenstein's remarks were violative of
Canon 2A must be evaluated in the context of the entire sentencing
hearing. Section 18-1-105(7), which was applicable to the sentencing
hearing in issue, requires a judge in imposing a sentence outside the
presumptive range to "make specific findings on the record of the case,
detailing the specific extraordinary circumstances which constitute the
reasons for varying from the presumptive sentence." Judge Lichtenstein's
remarks were made in an effort to place on record the extraordinary
mitigating circumstances that he believed justified a sentence below the
presumptive sentence of eight to twelve years applicable to second
degree murder. The judge was attempting to describe how the victim's
conduct, as perceived and interpreted by the defendant, brought about an
emotional state in the defendant similar to the "irresistible passion"
required for voluntary manslaughter. Although the sentencing comments
contain some phraseology which, when read in isolation, might have
offended the sensibilities of others, the full context of the sentencing
hearing indicates that the choice of words was no more than an awkwardly
executed effort to place on record the confused and highly emotional
state of the defendant at the time of the killing, which, in the judge's
opinion, constituted a mitigating circumstance justifying a sentence
below the presumptive range. The judge's comments were not intended to
be disrespectful of the law, the victim, or anyone else; nor do they
reasonably lend themselves to such a connotation in the full context of
the hearing. We thus conclude that the judge's remarks were not such as
to bring the judiciary into disrepute or to undermine public confidence
in the integrity or impartiality of the judicial system within the
intendment of Canon 2A.

The recommendation of the Commission for a public reprimand is rejected
and the case is returned to the Commission with directions to dismiss
the formal complaint.

Questions:

1. On August 15, 1982, Clarence Burns shot and killed his estranged
wife Patricia Ann Burns. Burns saw Patricia Ann's car parked near her
parents' house, and climbed into the trunk. Eventually, she drove their
son Darren to her new apartment. When they arrived, Burns emerged from
the trunk and followed them into the apartment. An argument ensued, and
Burns shot Patricia Ann five times in the face, killing her.
Lichtenstein's comments provoked considerable outrage and were widely
reported, including in the New York Times . Burns was eventually
sentenced to 10 years in prison, and served 6. You can watch a short
video about the case here . After the misconduct investigation,
Lichtenstein requested and received a transfer to civil court. However,
he continued to hear criminal cases on occasion, and made some other
controversial decisions . In 2000, the Colorado Criminal Defense Bar
established the Alvin D.




Lichtenstein Award "for remarkable accomplishments over a lifetime of
distinguished service."

1. Was the objection to Lichtenstein's conduct the sentence he imposed,
his explanation of the sentence, or both? Should judges be censured for
imposing lenient sentences?

1. The Colorado Supreme Court rejected the Commission's recommendation
to reprimand Lichtenstein. Do you agree with its decision? Why or why
not?

Further Reading:

- Cynthia Gray, The Line Between Legal Error and Judicial Misconduct:
Balancing Judicial

Independence and Accountability, 32 Hofstra L. Rev. 1245 (2004)
